614434	Markova et al. (2003) described an African American female patient with autosomal dominant cutis laxa. Extensive folding and redundant skin on the abdomen and arms were present shortly after birth. No signs of internal organ involvement were noted. Echocardiography and electrocardiography revealed mitral valve regurgitation. The parents were unaffected. At reexamination at age 11 years the patient was noted no have slightly hyperextensible skin, which demonstrated wrinkling on the back of the hands and the wrists, and slightly accentuated excessive skin folds on the abdomen. The cutaneous manifestations were noted to have improved significantly. The patient developed scoliosis.
614436	Guernsey et al. (2010) identified an extended multiply consanguineous family derived from a rural eastern Canadian isolate with 7 members affected with axonal CMT. Three further individuals were suspected to be affected. The index patient noted gradual onset of weakness around age 20, particularly affecting his distal lower extremities but also present in the hands. He noted episodic muscle cramping of extremity and trunk muscles. At the time of the examination he demonstrated bilateral pes cavus with marked wasting of distal lower extremity muscles and mild wasting of hand intrinsic muscles. Fasciculations were present in upper and lower extremity muscles. There was no gait ataxia. Upper and lower tendon reflexes were absent. He had mild loss of sensation on fingertips and severe loss of sensation in feet and legs, most markedly to vibration but also involving proprioception and pain perception. Other affected family members exhibited sensory and motor dysfunction with pes cavus. Autonomic symptoms were not consistently reported. Weakness and wasting were moderate and predominantly in distal lower extremity muscles. Onset was usually in the early adult years.; ; Weterman et al. (2012) reported a large 3-generation family with autosomal dominant inheritance of an axonal peripheral neuropathy consistent with CMT. Affected individuals presented in the second or third decade of life with progressive distal muscle weakness and mild sensory disturbances in the feet. Electrophysiologic studies in affected individuals revealed a severe axonal neuropathy. Sural nerve biopsy in one affected individual demonstrated severe axonal degeneration.; ; Nicolaou et al. (2013) reported a large 4-generation family from Sardinia with autosomal dominant axonal CMT. The proband developed distal weakness in the left lower limb and foot drop at about 34 years of age. At age 43, he showed moderate foot drop, could not stand on his heels, and had difficulty standing on his toes. There was atrophy in the lower legs and feet, as well as distal sensory loss. The upper limbs were not affected. He reported occasional cramps in the calf muscles and erectile dysfunction. Nerve conduction studies were consistent with an axonal form of CMT. Other affected family members had a similar phenotype, with onset between ages 15 and 50 years of slowly progressive distal weakness, atrophy, and multimodal hypesthesia in the lower limbs, diffusing to the upper limbs in later years. All except 1 patient remained ambulatory.; ; Berciano et al. (1986) described a large family of Spanish descent in which 10 members over 3 generations had a neuronal form of hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy. Peak age at onset was in the second decade. Some members showed slight slowing of conduction velocities, and 3 had normal conduction studies. Nerve biopsy showed regenerating fibers and atrophic axons, with some loss of myelinated fibers. There were several instances of male-to-male transmission. Nelis et al. (2004) presented follow-up studies on the family reported by Berciano et al. (1986). They noted that a total of 14 members of the family were affected. The age at onset ranged from 9 to 76 years (mean, 29 years), although most patients developed symptoms in the second decade. The disease presented with foot deformity and difficulty walking, with very slow progression. Ankle reflexes were absent or hypoactive in all patients, whereas knee reflexes were sometimes preserved. Mild stocking hypesthesia was present. There were normal or mildly decreased motor nerve conduction velocities (NCV) consistent with axonal CMT. Peeters et al. (2016) reported follow-up of the family reported by Berciano et al. (1986). Thirteen affected individuals spanning 3 generations had a mild, very slowly progressive or nonprogressive sensorimotor neuropathy affecting the lower limbs and resulting in difficulty walking. Affected individuals in the last generation, ranging in age from 35 to 47, were asymptomatic, but showed variable features including pes cavus, toe clawing, stocking hypoesthesia, ankle areflexia, and amyotrophy. Electrophysiologic studies showed normal or slightly decreased nerve conduction velocities and variably decreased SNAP and CMAP amplitudes. EMG studies were consistent with chronic denervation. MRI of lower limb muscles showed atrophy and fatty replacement. The findings were consistent with a length-dependent sensorimotor axonopathy affecting lumbosacral motor and sensory neurons. Several individuals previously thought to be affected in previous reports were reexamined and reclassified as being unaffected.; ; Peeters et al. (2016) emphasized that many of the patients had very mild or even clinically asymptomatic disease, making the diagnosis difficult in the absence of electrophysiologic studies.
614437	Ades et al. (1996) reported 4 unrelated children, 3 boys and 1 girl, with congenital abnormalities of the great vessels, comprising either single or multiple arterial aneurysms, aortic and/or arterial dilation, and/or vessel tortuosity. The authors noted that each child had a distinct phenotype, but all had in common the rare finding of aneurysms of the aorta and main pulmonary artery. Progression of these abnormalities was clearly evident in the female patient, who had diffuse vessel irregularity and tortuosity involving intraabdominal, intracranial, and extracranial arteries. She presented within the first 2 months of life with airway compression, aneurysm of the ascending aorta with dilatation of the proximal aortic arch and innominate artery, massive dilatation of the pulmonary trunk beyond the pulmonary valve, proximal pulmonary arterial stenosis, and moderate pulmonary regurgitation. After surgical repair of the aortic and pulmonary trunk aneurysms at 2.5 months of age, recurrent episodes of life-threatening respiratory obstruction developed at age 7 months, at which time she was found to have a massive recurrence of aneurysm of the ascending aorta and innominate artery, requiring reoperation at 8 months of age. Cineangiography at 39 months of age showed redundant aortic arch with significant dilation of the pulmonary trunk and proximal right and left branches and a mildly tortuous abdominal aorta with tortuosity and dilation of the major abdominal arteries. Ultrasonography at 4.5 years of age showed marked tortuosity and mild fusiform dilatation of the right common carotid artery, with less marked tortuosity of the left common carotid. Cerebral angiography at 5.5 years showed extreme tortuosity and dilatation of intra- and extracranial arteries. Other features in this patient included prominent eyes, bulbous nasal tip, prominent premaxilla, highly arched palate, micrognathia, generalized mild joint hypermobility, and velvety smooth skin with normal scarring. Histologic examination of tissue from the aorta and pulmonary artery showed a marked disruption of elastic fibers with an increase in deposition of interstitial glycosaminoglycans and marked thickening of the arterial intima. Large elastic fibers were markedly reduced in number and small elastic fibers were highly irregular in distribution. Analysis of dermal fibroblasts from this patient demonstrated that the proportion of collagen forming mature crosslinks was within the normal range, as was the kinetics of crosslink formation.; ; Baspinar et al. (2005) studied a 3-year-old boy referred for evaluation of a widened mediastinum discovered on routine chest x-ray. The boy had unusually flattened facies with a prominent forehead, depressed nasal bridge, hypertelorism, narrow nostrils, high-arched palate, pectus excavatum, and moderate hypermobility of the joints. CT of the chest revealed a dilated aortic arch; transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated an aneurysmal dilation of the ascending aorta and a high aortic arch with a kink at the isthmus level. The diameters of the aortic valve, aortic root at the sinus Valsalva level, and the ascending aorta were 1.07 cm, 2.8 cm, and 4.3 cm, respectively. Aortography showed an elongated aorta with 2 acute curves, at the arcus aorta and at the diaphragmatic level. Although the boy was asymptomatic, he was placed on beta blocker therapy due to the risk of spontaneous rupture of the ascending aorta. Baspinar et al. (2005) noted that the facial dysmorphism and multiple joint dislocations were suggestive of Larsen syndrome (150250).; ; Hucthagowder et al. (2006) described a patient with cutis laxa and severe systemic connective tissue abnormalities. The patient, the child of unaffected nonconsanguineous parents of Iraqi descent, was born with multiple fractures at gestational age 36 weeks, after an uneventful pregnancy, although oligohydramnios was reported. Examination at age 9 months revealed generalized cutis laxa with soft, velvety, and transparent skin. Additional observations included hypotonia, emphysema, generalized arterial tortuosity, inguinal and diaphragmatic hernia, joint laxity, and pectus excavatum. Diaphragmatic plication was performed at the age of 10 months. During surgery, both arterial and venous tortuosity, emphysematous and hyperexpanded lungs, and an esophagus not fixed to the posterior chest were observed. The diaphragm contained very little muscle and mainly consisted of pleuroperitoneal membrane. Aortic root aneurysm was diagnosed at the age of 2 years.; ; Dasouki et al. (2007) reported an infant girl with apparent arachnodactyly, mild cutis laxa, and severe systemic vascular abnormalities that were inoperable and incompatible with life; she died on day 27 of life. Autopsy findings included biventricular hypertrophy and right ventricle dilatation, aneurysmal dilation of the ascending aorta and main branches of pulmonary arteries with dissection of the wall, and intussusception-like telescoping of the inner arterial layer causing severe luminal narrowing of the main branches of the pulmonary arteries. Histopathologic examination of skin, aortic wall, and pulmonary artery revealed that elastic fibers in all 3 tissues were markedly decreased in density, fragmented, and shortened.; ; Hoyer et al. (2009) reported the third case of cutis laxa due to FBLN4 mutation (604633.0004). The patient was an infant girl who was born of consanguineous Iraqi parents, from a pregnancy remarkable for fetal overgrowth and oligohydramnios, and who died immediately after birth with extreme bradycardia. She exhibited cutis laxa, arachnodactyly of hands and feet with contractures of the third to fifth fingers, medial rotation of feet, spina bifida of the os sacrum, microcephaly, and facial dysmorphism. Autopsy showed collapsed lungs with hypoplastic diaphragm and signs of cervical soft tissue bleeding due to vessel fragility. Histologic examination showed fragmentation of elastic fibers with formation of cystic cavities in the medial layer of the aorta and central lung vessels. Hoyer et al. (2009) stated that this case extended the phenotypic spectrum of FBLN4 mutations to include microcephaly, overgrowth, and arachnodactyly.; ; Kappanayil et al. (2012) reported 22 unrelated infants, members of the Mappila Muslim group from the northern coastal Malabar region of the southern Indian state of Kerala. Eight of these patients had a family history of consanguinity; 4 families had a history of infant death. Patients presented at a median age of 1.5 months with the typical aneurysmal dilatation, elongation, tortuosity, and narrowing of the aorta, pulmonary artery and their branches seen in other patients with ARC1B. The phenotype included a variable combination of cutis laxa (52%), long philtrum with thin vermilion (90%), micrognathia (43%), hypertelorism (57%), prominent eyes (43%), sagging cheeks (43%), long, slender digits (48%), and visible arterial pulsations (38%). Early death (at 4 months of age or less) occurred in 17 of 21 patients homozygous for the same mutation (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). Isthmic hypoplasia in 9 correlated with early death.
614438	Lin et al. (2011) identified a patient with de Barsy syndrome from a nonconsanguineous Chinese family whose birth weight (2.4 kg) and length (42 cm) were both below the 3rd centile. At birth he had wide fontanels, prominent forehead, fine and sparse hair, splayed eyebrows, sunken eyes, small palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, pinched nose with hypoplastic nares, thin lips, and posteriorly rotated large helices. Skin was thin, wrinkled, and translucent, showing superficial veins. He had flexion contractures of upper limbs, flat feet, bilateral inguinal hernia, and undescended testes. Congenital glaucoma and blue sclerae were identified at 1 month of age. He had dislocation of hip joints and idiopathic hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. At 6 years of age he could speak only a few words. He had osteoporosis identified by 3 years of age and a dilated aortic root identified at 4 years. He sustained bilateral femoral neck fractures and had significant speech delay, athetoid movements, and moderate intellectual disability. Brain MRI was normal.?
614441	Venencie et al. (1988) reported a 35-year-old man who had pachydermoperiostosis (PDP) with severe coarsening of facial skin and cutis verticis gyrata of the scalp, who also exhibited anemia and gastric hypertrophy. In addition to myelofibrosis, a serum inhibitor of the late stage of erythropoiesis was detected in this patient. Because the proband had elevated serum osteocalcin (BGLAP; 112260) and transiliac bone biopsy showed normal bone resorption, the authors suggested that 'primary' hypertrophic osteoarthropathy represents an imbalance between increased osteoblastic bone formation and normal bone resorption. The proband's father was reported to have digital clubbing.; ; Compton et al. (1997) reported 3 brothers who had PDP as well as gastrointestinal disease. The features of PDP became evident in the second decade of life in all 3 patients, and included pachydermia, periostosis, and digital clubbing, as well as hyperhidrosis and leg edema in 2 of the brothers. The oldest brother was noted to be anemic at age 46 years, and colonoscopic biopsy specimens showed ileocolitis consistent with Crohn disease (CD; see 266600). The youngest brother developed abdominal cramping and weight loss at age 21; ileal resection with ileocolostomy at age 35 showed focal severe transmural ileocolitis. However, the middle brother underwent resection of ileum for partial obstruction at age 17, which showed multiple subacute annular and stellate ulcers with intervening sacculations between ulcers. No granulomas were present, and this was felt to represent 'atypical' CD. Umeno et al. (2018) stated that these brothers had chronic nonspecific ulcers of the small intestine (CNSU) rather than CD.; ; Castori et al. (2005) reported a 37-year-old Italian man with pachydermoperiostosis (PDP), born of unaffected consanguineous parents. At puberty, the patient noted progressive enlargement of the hands, feet, and knees, as well as facial furrowing. He had redundant skin on the scalp, cheeks, forehead, eyelids, palms, and soles. Seborrhea, folliculitis, and hyperhidrosis were also present. There was terminal broadening of the fingers and toes, and cylindrical enlargement of the legs and forearms. Skeletal radiographs of the long bones showed soft tissue swelling and dense, shaggy, periosteal ossification with cortical thickening. Endosteal and periosteal hyperostosis caused loss of the normal tubulation of the long bones, especially in the hands and feet. The calvarium was moderately thickened. Disease progression ceased at the age of 25 years. The proband had no history of peptic ulcer, gastritis, or other gastrointestinal afflictions. However, in a review of published families with PDP, the authors noted that 6 (12%) of 49 patients with presumed autosomal recessive PDP had gastrointestinal involvement, including 3 with peptic ulcer disease and 3 diagnosed with Crohn disease.; ; Harifi et al. (2011) described a consanguineous Moroccan family in which a 14-year-old boy had primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO). The proband developed intermittent arthralgia and profuse sweating of palms and soles at 12 years of age, associated with enlargement of the fingertips. Examination revealed large hands and feet with marked digital clubbing, and enlarged and swollen ankles and knees. He had no facial dysmorphism or thickening or furrowing of facial features, and pachydermia and cutis verticis gyrata were not observed. X-rays documented soft tissue swelling and periosteal reaction at the radial, ulnar, tibial, metacarpal, metatarsal, and proximal phalangeal diaphyses in the absence of acroosteolysis. Laboratory tests revealed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and a marked increase in C-reactive protein (123260) and bone-modeling markers. Examination of other family members revealed variable manifestations in 3: the father and 19-year-old brother of the proband displayed digital clubbing, and periosteal ossification on the distal ends of the long bones was evident. His 10-year-old sister had no bone or joint complaints, but inconspicuous clubbing of the digits was observed, in the absence of periosteal new bone formation on x-ray. Harifi et al. (2011) concluded that this family had an incomplete form of PHO, with isolated bone involvement and limited skin changes.; ; By retrospective medical chart review, Matsumoto et al. (2011) identified 13 Japanese patients with CNSU who had presented between 1964 to 2009, including 11 females and 2 males. Criteria for the diagnosis of CNSU included iron-deficiency anemia and hypoproteinemia in adolescence; small bowel lesions consisting of multiple shallow ulcers in the ileum, with sharply demarcated margins and a linear or oblique configuration; and persistence of clinical manifestations for more than 5 years. All 13 patients had hypochromic anemia of obscure origin as the presenting symptom; 3 patients also exhibited edema, and 2 experienced abdominal pain. Onset of symptoms occurred in the second decade of life for most patients, with the earliest onset at age 8 years and the latest at age 37. None of the patients were taking nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs at the time of initial diagnosis. Most patients had hypoproteinemia in addition to anemia, and both continued over long-term follow-up, with patients requiring iron supplementation and total parenteral or enteral nutrition. Six of the patients were born of parents of known consanguinity, and 2 of these patients reported an affected sib. The authors concluded that CNSU appeared to be a chronic enteropathy segregating in offspring from consanguineous marriages.; ; Zhang et al. (2012) reported 3 Han Chinese male probands with PHO from 3 unrelated families, 1 of which was consanguineous. Disease onset in the 3 probands occurred at 12 to 15 years of age and manifested as digital clubbing, swelling of the knees, periostosis, and a progressive thickening and furrowing of facial skin. One proband (family 2) experienced gastrointestinal hemorrhage due to gastric ulcer at age 21 years. Echocardiography revealed no patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) or other cardiac defects in the 3 affected individuals. No other family members were affected. Urinary prostaglandin E2 levels were 16 times higher in the 3 patients than in unaffected family members, and urinary PGE-M concentrations were 6 times higher.; ; Busch et al. (2012) reported 6 male patients from 4 unrelated families, 2 Indian and 2 Japanese, who had typical features of PHO and mutation in the SLCO2A1 gene. Onset of symptoms was in the second and third decades of life. Prostaglandin metabolites were markedly elevated in all 4 patients in whom they were measured. The presence or absence of anemia or gastrointestinal symptoms was not reported in these patients.; ; Zhang et al. (2013) reported 5 unrelated Chinese male patients with PHO and biallelic mutations in the SLCO2A1 gene, who all experienced watery diarrhea, mostly precipitated by cold drinks. Acne was present in all 5 of them, and 1 had hyperhidrosis. In addition, the proband in family 1 and 2 of his 4 sisters presented severe anemia and hypoalbuminemia. None of the patients had a history of PDA, and all parents were unaffected.; ; Umeno et al. (2015) reported 18 Japanese patients, 14 female and 4 male, with CNSU and mutation in the SLCO2A1 gene. All patients had ulcers in the ileum; 8 also had duodenal ulcers, and 5 had stomach ulcers. Features of PHO were present in 11 (61%) of the patients, 7 of whom exhibited mild digital clubbing or periostosis; and there were 3 male patients who fulfilled the major clinical criteria for PHO, with digital clubbing, periostosis, and pachydermia.; ; Lee et al. (2016) studied 2 Korean families with PHO (families 2 and 3). In family 2, the 19-year-old proband had onset of thickened lower legs and ankle swelling at age 17 years, with hyperhidrosis and acne. He also had PDA requiring surgical correction, as well as atrial septal defect and valvular heart disease. Examination showed enlargement of the terminal phalanges and furrowing of facial skin, and skeletal survey revealed periosteal thickening of the long bones. In family 3, 2 brothers had progressive pachydermia with enlarged hands and feet since puberty, with hyperhidrosis, acne, and forehead furrowing. One brother had PDA requiring surgical repair in infancy. Both brothers also experienced watery diarrhea, but colonoscopic findings were unremarkable. Skeletal survey confirmed periosteal thickening of the long bones. The parents in both families were clinically unaffected. The authors noted that family 3 had been independently reported by Kim et al. (2015).; ; Li et al. (2017) reported 33 Chinese men with PHO and mutation in the SLCO2A1 gene. Peak age at onset occurred during puberty, and clinical phenotypes were varied, ranging from isolated finger clubbing to severe pachydermia and disabling joint swelling. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage, anemia, and/or watery diarrhea were reported in 19 (58%) of the patients.; ; Hosoe et al. (2017) reviewed the endoscopic and clinical features of 22 Japanese patients with CNSU and mutation in the SLCO2A1 gene, who were ascertained by nationwide survey of teaching hospitals. Mean age at onset was 21 years, with a range from 1 year to 50 years. The patients, including 17 women and 5 men, all had multiple shallow ulcers in the ileum, with half also having ulcers in the duodenum and/or jejunum. All were anemic and hypoalbuminemic, and all had experienced stenosis of the small bowel. Features of PHO, including digital clubbing, periostosis, and/or pachydermia, were present in 23 to 27% of patients. The authors noted that there were no differences in terms of ulcer development or distribution between patients with and without PHO. ; ; Umeno et al. (2018) reviewed the clinical features of 46 Japanese patients, 33 female and 13 male, from 43 families that were ascertained by a nationwide survey recruiting for patients with CNSU and mutation in the SLCO2A1 gene. The median age at disease onset was 16.5 years, but age at onset varied widely, from 1 year to 69 years. Anemia was present in 45 (98%) of the 46 patients, abdominal pain in 18 (39%), and edema in 11 (24%). All but 1 (98%) had ileal ulceration; the duodenum was also involved in 48%, the jejunum in 31%, and the stomach in 26%, and there was sparing of the terminal ileum in all. Fourteen (30%) of 44 patients who underwent x-ray examination had digital clubbing, periostosis, and/or pachydermia, and 5 male patients (11%) had all 3 clinical manifestations, fulfilling the major criteria for PHO. ; ; Hong et al. (2022) reported 14 female and 2 male patients from 11 Korean families with CNSU and mutation in the SLCO2A1 gene. The mean age of symptom onset was 18 years (range, 2 years to 40 years). All presented with abdominal pain, 13 (93%) had anemia, and 10 (71%) had hypoalbuminemia. The most commonly involved segment of the small intestine was the ileum (13 patients; 93%), with sparing of the terminal ileum observed in only 3 patients (21%); and the jejunum was involved in 6 patients (43%), the duodenum in 5 (36%), and the stomach in 2 (14%). Colonic involvement was detected in 2 patients, who had circular and superficial colonic ulcers that were similar to those observed in the ileum; the authors stated that the was the first time colonic involvement had been reported in patients with SLCO2A1-associated CNSU. In addition, features of PHO were present in 5 (36%) of the patients, and 2 men and 1 woman exhibited all 3 major PHO manifestations (digital clubbing, pachydermia, and periostosis).; ; Kimball et al. (2024) reported 2 unrelated Mexican men with PHO and chronic enteropathy and mutation in the SLCO2A1 gene. Patient 1 was a 39-year-old man who underwent surgery at age 12 years for partial duodenal stenosis due to recurrent ulceration. At age 19, panendoscopy and biopsies showed multiple duodenal ulcers limited to the mucosal and submucosal layers, as well as erythematous gastropathy. He later required gastrectomy due to upper gastrointestinal bleeding. His sister died at age 15 years due to gastointestinal complications. The proband also experienced progressive enlargement of the hands, digital clubbing, and palmoplantar hyperhidrosis beginning at age 16, with later onset of cutis verticis gyrata. Patient 2 was a 24-year-old man who had noted enlargement of hands, digital clubbing, and progressive pachydermia of the forehead and skull at age 18. He had enlarged knee joints as well as generalized hyperhidrosis and mechanical blepharoptosis. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed congestive gastropathy and upper esophageal trachealization, and he had normocytic normochromic regenerative anemia.
614450	Bochukova et al. (2012) described a 6-year-old girl, born of unrelated parents of white European origin, who presented with growth retardation. At 18 months of age, her height was in the tenth percentile, and the deficit persisted; in addition, she had decreased subischial leg length with a normal sitting height. Tooth eruption was delayed: she had no teeth at 12 months of age, only 8 deciduous teeth at 26 months, and no secondary dentition at 6 years of age. She had a borderline-high body mass index (23.5), and severe constipation had been noted since weaning at the age of 7 months. Mild hypermobility and ligamentous laxity was present in the ankle and knee. Muscle tone was reduced with normal power but with impairment in gross and fine motor coordination, resulting in a slow broad-based gait, clumsiness, and difficulty with fine motor skills, including an inability to write or draw. Her affect was placid, with slow monotonous speech, but with no receptive or expressive deficit. Neuropsychologic assessment showed restricted adaptive behavior and significant impairments in selected cognitive domains. Laboratory analysis revealed low-normal or subnormal levels of total thyroxine and free thyroxine, high-normal or elevated levels of total triiodothyronine and free triiodothyronine, and normal levels of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), resulting in markedly subnormal ratios of free thyroxine to free triiodothyronine and of total thyroxine to total triiodothyronine with a very low level of circulating reverse triiodothyronine. The level of serum thyroxine-binding globulin was normal. Skeletal radiographs showed delayed fusion of cranial sutures with a patent anterior fontanel, multiple wormian bones, and delayed tooth eruption, together with femoral epiphyseal dysgenesis and delayed bone age (chronologic age, 6.3 years; bone age, 2.9 years). Abdominal radiography revealed bowel dilatation with abnormal retention of ingested marker pellets, confirming delayed intestinal transit. The child had a low resting heart rate and blood pressure, of 71 bpm and 82/51 mm Hg, respectively, as well as basal metabolic rate (BMR) that was below normal. However, the level of serum sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG; 182205), a hepatic marker of thyroid hormone action, was markedly elevated, and a normal growth hormone (139250) response to provocative testing was associated with slightly subnormal levels of insulin-like growth factor (IGF1; 147440). Thyroid replacement therapy led to normalization of free thyroxine, free triiodothyronine, and IGF1, with full suppression of TSH and normalization of her BMR, but she continued to have a high level of sex hormone-binding globulin, and her pulse rate and blood pressure remained abnormally low, as did the growth rate and intestinal transit time.; ; Van Mullem et al. (2012) reported a father and daughter with congenital hypothyroidism. The daughter was an 11-year-old girl who in the first 3 years of life had macroglossia, omphalocele, congenital hip dislocation, no hip ossification centers, delayed closure of skull sutures, delayed tooth eruption, delayed motor development, and macrocephaly. She had low levels of free thyroxine (T4) with normal levels of TSH. Evaluation at 6 years of age for short stature showed delayed bone age, and she was found to have low-normal IGF1 and high cholesterol levels in addition to abnormal levels of thyroid hormone. Hypothyroidism was clinically apparent, with dry skin, slow tendon reflexes, slow reactions, and drowsiness. Treatment with levothyroxine resulted in initial catch-up growth and decreases in serum levels of TSH and cholesterol. At 8.5 years of age, her height remained 2 SD below normal, and treatment with growth hormone had little effect. At 11 years of age, her bone age was 9 years and her height was 1.81 SD below normal; she also had mild cognitive deficits with an IQ of 90. Her father had very similar characteristics, including short stature (3.77 SD below normal), free T4 in the low-normal range, high T3, and normal TSH, high cholesterol levels, IGF1 in the low-normal range, suppressed growth hormone stimulation, and mild cognitive deficits (IQ, 85). Both father and daughter had constipation when not receiving levothyroxine.; ; Tylki-Szymanska et al. (2015) studied 5 Polish children who presented with delayed delivery, relatively high birth weight and length, large head circumference relative to chest circumference, and floppiness. All exhibited a similar clinical phenotype that included growth retardation with relatively short limbs, hands, and feet and long thorax; mild to moderate mental retardation; mild skeletal dysplasia; constipation; deep voice; and facial dysmorphism consisting of a round or puffy and somewhat coarse flat face, flat nasal bridge, upturned nose, and hypertelorism. Other features included puffy hands and feet, skin with rough and doughy texture, tortuosity of arteries of dorsal hands and feet, and clubfeet. In 2 patients with more pronounced clinical features, mild cardiomyopathy was also noted. Height gain became slower after 2 years of age, resulting in marked short stature, and growth retardation was disproportionate, primarily affecting the lower segment. Laboratory analysis revealed anemia and slightly elevated creatine kinase and cholesterol, as well as low free thyroxine, high free triiodothyronine, and normal TSH; treatment with levothyroxine did not ameliorate any of the clinical symptoms. Radiologic examination showed ovoid immature vertebral bodies, anterior-superior ossification defect in the lower thoracic and upper lumbar bodies, and hypoplasia of the acetabular and supraacetabular portions of the ilia and coxa vara. Hand x-rays showed minimal changes in tubular bones.
614455	Lemieux and Neemeh (1967) reported a French family in which several individuals had CMT disease, 1 of whom also had clear renal involvement. The 21-year-old proband developed walking difficulties at age 8 years, requiring orthopedic corrections, and showed hand weakness at age 14. At age 21 years, she had atrophy and weakness of the peroneal and anterior tibial muscles with steppage gait, atrophy of the distal muscles of the forearm, claw hands, and areflexia. At ages 19 and 21 years, she presented with fever associated with proteinuria and was found to have focal glomerulosclerosis and atrophic tubules on renal biopsy. However, renal function was normal. Her mother, a brother, and a sister had CMT, and the mother and 2 sisters had mild proteinuria, but no further renal studies were performed. Lemieux and Neemeh (1967) also reported 2 brothers with childhood-onset CMT, chronic nephritis, and deafness. However, mutations in the INF2 gene were not found in these brothers, suggesting that they may have had a different disorder (Boyer, 2012). Hanson et al. (1970) reported a patient with distal muscle wasting, nephritis, and deafness, but with no family history of these features. Boyer et al. (2011) reported 12 index cases of genetically confirmed CMTDIE. The median age of onset of proteinuria was 18 years (range, 10-21 years), with 11 patients developing end-stage renal disease at a median age of 21 years (range, 12-47 years). Renal biopsies showed typical FSGS. The median age at onset of neurologic dysfunction was 13 years (range, 5-28 years), and all had distal muscle atrophy and weakness affecting the lower limbs, although the severity was variable; older individuals had greater impairment. Four patients developed proteinuria before neurologic symptoms, 5 developed neurologic symptoms before proteinuria, and 3 developed both symptoms at the same time. The neurologic symptoms were progressive, and included difficulties walking, frequent falls, steppage gait, hypo- or areflexia, pes cavus, and distal sensory impairment. Seven patients also had significant upper limb involvement, some of whom had paresis of the hand muscles resulting in claw hands. Sural nerve biopsies showed axonal loss and onion bulb formation, and neurophysiologic studies were variable, most consistent with an intermediate form of CMT. Four patients also had mild to moderate sensorineural hearing loss.
614457	Aldahmesh et al. (2011) reported 2 unrelated patients, both born of consanguineous parents, with a severe neurodevelopmental disorder associated with ichthyosis. The patients were of Saudi Arabian and Asian Indian descent, respectively. The first patient was noted to have a collodion membrane covering the skin at birth, which resolved and was replaced with dry ichthyotic skin affecting all regions of the body. He showed profound developmental delay and was severely handicapped with little interest in his surroundings when examined at age 6 years. At age 4 months, he developed frequent refractory seizures. He also had severe hypertonia in the upper and lower extremities and was generally immobile, consistent with spastic quadriplegia. Although ophthalmologic examination was limited, he had a normal electroretinogram, normal macula, and high myopia. Brain MRI showed severely delayed myelination and brain atrophy. Other features included recurrent bronchial asthmatic attacks, bilateral inguinal hernias, small testicular size, and loss of most of his teeth. There were no clear dysmorphic features. The mother's eye examination was completely normal, whereas the father's eye examination showed some drusen-like flecks in the macula, which may have been due to heavy smoking. The second patient showed dry skin shortly after birth, but no collodion membrane. The skin later had generalized erythematous ichthyosis with fine scales over most of the body but not on the face. The hair and nails appeared normal. He had profound psychomotor delay and developed myoclonic seizures at 2 months. He had very poor growth and microcephaly, but no dysmorphic features. Other features included hypotonia in all 4 limbs, scissoring and contractures of the lower extremities, and unilateral inguinal hernia. Ophthalmologic exam showed no cataract or macular abnormalities, but there was temporal pallor in both eyes and photophobia, and visual evoked potentials were abnormal. The patient was bedridden and never gained the ability to sit, speak, or feed himself. He died from aspiration at age 2 years; a similarly affected sib died at 6 months of age. The combination of ichthyosis, intellectual disability, and spastic quadriplegia in these patients was reminiscent of Sjogren-Larsson syndrome (SLS; 270200).
614458	Mayr et al. (2011) reported 5 individuals from 3 unrelated families with variable manifestations of thiamine pyrophosphokinase deficiency. Two sisters had the most severe phenotype compared to the other patients. The older sister showed developmental delay from the first year of life, and lost the ability to walk after an infection-induced encephalopathic episode at age 15 months. During this episode, she had increased serum and CSF lactate. She started to walk again at 3 years of age, but continued to show muscular hypotonia and delayed psychomotor development. She had 2 further crises with encephalopathy and lactic acidosis triggered by viral infections, and died during the last crisis at the age of 8.5 years. Her sister had normal development until 18 months when she developed recurrent encephalopathic episodes associated with mildly increased CSF lactate and resulting in gait and truncal ataxia, dystonia, and eventual loss of ability to walk. She died at the age of 3.5 years during a viral infection. Both girls showed episodic increased urinary alpha-ketoglutaric acid. The second family included a brother and sister born of consanguineous Iraqi parents. Both showed normal development during the first 3 years of life, but developed progressive spasticity, dystonia, and eventual loss of gait starting at age 4. The girl lost the ability to speak, developed seizures, and was wheelchair-bound at age 11 years; however, cognition was intact. Brain MRI showed global brain atrophy and increased signal intensities in the globus pallidus, and MR spectroscopy showed a lactate peak in the basal ganglia. Urinary organic acids showed elevated alpha-ketoglutaric acid and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid. She also had mild left ventricular hypertrophy. Her younger brother had progressive dystonia, walking difficulties, and mild microcephaly, but he had adequate cognitive development at age 7 years, and brain MRI was normal. The index patient from the third family had the mildest phenotype. Beginning at age 2 years, he had several episodes of dizziness and vertigo, as well as intermittent gait ataxia, but all episodes showed spontaneous remission. At age 10.5 years, he had a severe and prolonged episode of encephalopathy with loss of speech, headache, seizures, and extensor plantar responses, progressing to dysarthria, intention tremor, confusion, episodic ataxia, and nystagmus, and resulting in coma. Serum and CSF lactate were increased, and MRI showed changes in the white matter of the cerebellum, increased signal intensities in the corticospinal tract at the medulla oblongata, and slightly increased intensities in the dorsal pons. This episode was followed by slow regression of clinical signs in the following months. At age 17 years, he had normal mental development and attended high school; the only residual signs were dysphonia and mild paresis of the soft palate.; ; Eckenweiler et al. (2021) described a patient who presented with acute onset of irritability and balance disturbance at 11 months of age. She presented with a second acute episode 8 months later in the setting of a respiratory infection, which was characterized by dystonia and dysphagia. Brain MRI with spectroscopy showed symmetric T2 hyperintensities in the posterior putamen and dentate nuclei and a lactate peak in the basal ganglia. She was started on biotin and thiamine therapy and had no further acute episodes.; ; Li et al. (2020) reported a patient with recurrent encephalopathy beginning at 8 months of age. At 2 years and 1 month of age, she had moderate intellectual and motor disabilities. Urine alpha-ketoglutarate was elevated. Brain MRI showed bilateral abnormal signal in the caudate nucleus, putamen, thalamus, and cerebellar hemispheres. After a trauma at 4 years and 5 months of age, she lost the ability to talk, and at 5 years of age she was hospitalized for dysarthria, lethargy, and muscle weakness after a febrile illness. She improved with thiamine supplementation.
614462	Mayr et al. (2011) reported a boy, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with a severe metabolic disorder resulting in death at age 4 years. He developed seizures on day 3 of life, and showed hypotonia and poor sucking. His condition worsened, and he developed recurrent apneas and reduced consciousness associated with increased serum lactate. On day 11 of life, he had further metabolic deterioration, with acute respiratory deficiency necessitating artificial ventilation for 17 days; chest radiographs showed an infiltration of the lungs. Initial brain imaging had been normal, but he developed severe brain edema at this time. Urinalysis showed increased glutaric acid and glycine, and plasma glycine was also increased. Brain sonography showed multicystic encephalopathy and hydrocephalus ex vacuo, which was likely secondary to the metabolic crisis. Echocardiography showed a mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. After this episode, the child had severely retarded psychomotor development, contractures, spastic tetraparesis, epilepsy, microcephaly, sleep disturbances, and intermittently increased serum lactate. He died at home from a respiratory tract infection.; ; Baker et al. (2014) reported 2 unrelated children who presented in the first days of life with hypotonia and seizures. A Somali girl, born of consanguineous parents, had a severe disease course with failure to thrive, microcephaly, severe psychomotor retardation, myoclonus, and spasticity resulting in death at 2 years 8 months of age. Brain imaging showed cerebral atrophy of the cortex and white matter, as well as multiple signal abnormalities in the subcortical and cerebellar regions. The other child, a boy born of unrelated Turkish parents, responded to antiseizure medication and had his last seizure at age 12 years, but had delayed psychomotor development. His sister presented at birth with hypotonia and seizures, and died at age 7 months. All 3 patients had increased serum glycine; lactate was increased in the 1 patient in whom it was measured. Studies of cells from the 2 probands showed decreased activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex with absent or decreased lipoylated E2 subunits. Patient cells also showed absent activity of the glycine cleavage enzyme system. Mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes were normal in patient fibroblasts.; ; Wongkittichote et al. (2023) described a patient with HGCLAS who had developmental problems starting at 6 months of age. Brain MRI at that time showed atrophy of the frontal lobes. A repeat brain MRI at 1 year of age showed microcephaly with reduced supratentorial spaces. At 3 years of age, she presented with tonic-clonic seizures. An MRI at 5 years of age showed diffuse abnormal signal in the frontal and occipitoparietal white matter and frontotemporal hypoplasia. Laboratory testing showed elevated CSF and plasma glycine levels. At 15 years of age, she had profound global developmental delay with an estimated developmental age of 2 years.
614464	Lee et al. (2012) reported 8 patients from 3 consanguineous families with Joubert syndrome. All patients had hypotonia, ataxia, psychomotor delay with mental retardation, and the molar tooth sign on brain imaging. More variable features included postaxial polydactyly, breathing abnormalities, and oculomotor apraxia. Seven of the patients did not have hepatic or renal involvement; 2 had retinal involvement.
614465	Lee et al. (2012) reported 8 consanguineous Arab families with Joubert syndrome. The phenotype included the molar tooth sign on brain imaging, oculomotor apraxia, variable coloboma, and rare kidney involvement. One patient had polydactyly and a fetus had an encephalocele.
614468	Gandhi et al. (2009) reported 3 unrelated multigenerational families with atypical cold urticaria. Affected individuals developed pruritic erythema with urticaria and sometimes angioedema within 5 minutes after exposure to cold. Most patients had onset in the first 6 months of life, and all had lifelong duration of the symptoms, although most noted a subjective improvement of the severity of the symptoms after age 30 years. Evaporative cooling appeared to be the most significant trigger, as all patients reported symptoms after cold exposure. For example, a patient's tear at room temperature produced erythema along the line of the teardrop; skin submerged in warm water and then exposed to room temperature became pruritic and erythematous; and cutaneous testing showed that evaporation of water drops produced erythema and urticaria at the site of the drop. Outdoor air cold challenge resulted in erythema and isolated urticarial lesions over unprotected skin. Localized cutaneous reactions did not generalize, and most resolved within 30 minutes of rewarming. A questionnaire was administered to 2 families. A history of atopy was reported in 84% of patients in 1 family, and in 14% in a second family. Triggers included cold atmosphere (100%), aquatic activities (92% and 100% of patients in the 2 families, respectively), handling cold objects (54% and 71%, respectively), and ingestion of cold foods or beverages (69% and 100%, respectively). Ingestion of cold foods or beverages caused oropharyngeal swelling in 29% and 43% of patients from each family, respectively. Other complications included syncope or near syncope (46% and 86%, respectively), usually related to emergence from water. All patients had pruritus and erythema, but angioedema occurred in less than 50% of patients. However, all affected individuals had negative cold stimulation time test (CSTT) results, with erythema but no wheal formation after direct skin contact with ice followed by a 5-minute rewarming period at room temperature. Gandhi et al. (2009) suggested that the phenomenon in these families occurred when a cooling threshold is reached that triggers the cutaneous symptoms, and that this threshold is likely warmer than that of the ice-cube test. Skin biopsy specimens showed a mast cell infiltrate with the appearance of degranulation after cold challenge. The disorder could be distinguished from familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (FCAS1; 120100) by the lack of severe systemic involvement and from acquired cold urticaria by the negative CSTT test.; ; Ombrello et al. (2012) reported 3 unrelated families with FCAS3, including 1 family reported by Gandhi et al. (2009). All patients had negative results on skin testing with ice-cube and cold-water immersion, but had positive results on skin testing for evaporative cooling and generalized exposure to cold air. In addition, 26 of 27 patients tested showed immunologic defects, including antibody deficiency (75%), recurrent infections (56%), and autoantibodies or autoimmune disease (56%). Seven individuals had cutaneous nodular granulomatous disease: 4 had persistent granulomatous skin disease and 3 had resolution of the symptoms in infancy. Laboratory studies showed decreased serum IgA and IgM, decreased circulating B cells, decreased memory B cells, and decreased natural killer cells. Most had increased IgE.
614470	Oliveira et al. (2007) reported a 49-year-old patient with autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome who had a lifelong overexpansion of lymphocytes and a history of childhood leukemia and early adulthood lymphoma, both successfully treated. There were no developmental defects. Laboratory studies showed increased serum CD4-/CD8- (double-negative) alpha/beta T cells and lymph node follicular hyperplasia. There was no evidence of CD95 (134637)-mediated apoptosis, but the patient's lymphocytes resisted death by IL2 (147680) withdrawal, indicating a specific defect in lymphocyte apoptosis. Further studies of the patient's lymphocytes showed a decrease of the proapoptotic protein BIM (BCL2L11; 603827), which is critical for cytokine withdrawal-induced mitochondrial apoptosis.; ; Niemela et al. (2010) reported 2 unrelated Caucasian girls with RALD presenting in childhood. One had lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and recurrent upper respiratory infections. She developed several autoimmune conditions, including hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia. Laboratory studies showed hypergammaglobulinemia, B-cell lymphocytosis, monocytosis, and autoantibodies. Alpha/beta CD4-/CD8- T cells were not increased. She continued to have recurrent inflammatory episodes affecting the respiratory tract, but without documentation of an infectious agent. She died at age 13 years after a fever and cardiac arrest. The second patient presented at age 5 years with acute viral infections and was found to have splenomegaly, neutropenia, monocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and a facial rash. Throughout childhood, she had recurrent vasculitis of the lower limbs and developed pancytopenia and lymphadenopathy. Laboratory studies showed autoantibodies and hypergammaglobulinemia. Her psychomotor development was normal. Patient T cells showed resistance to apoptosis after IL2 withdrawal, and BIM levels were reduced.; ; Takagi et al. (2011) reported 2 unrelated children who presented with RALD at ages 9 and 5 months, respectively. Both had significant lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly, hemolytic anemia, autoimmune thrombocytopenia, hypergammaglobulinemia, and autoantibodies. Neither had a significant increase of CD4-/CD8- alpha/beta T cells, but T cells from both patients showed apoptotic resistance to IL2 withdrawal. Western blot analysis showed decreased expression of BIM in activated T cells and B cells.
614473	Glatz et al. (2006) described 2 patients with idiopathic infantile arterial calcification (IIAC). The first was an infant girl who presented at 33 days of life with tachypnea, tachycardia, cool extremities, and poor peripheral pulses. Echocardiography demonstrated cardiac dysfunction and an electrocardiogram and cardiac enzyme levels were suggestive of myocardial infarction (MI). Despite intensive care, her condition deteriorated over the next 2 weeks and the patient died after withdrawal of support at 6.5 weeks of age. Autopsy revealed a markedly enlarged heart, with multiple areas of focal hemorrhage, necrosis, and calcification consistent with MI. Microscopic examination of the vasculature revealed calcification of all major coronary arteries, as well as involvement of the aorta, main and branch pulmonary arteries, celiac, hepatic, suprarenal, pancreaticoduodenal, splenic, mesenteric, renal, and lumbar arteries. Involved arteries showed calcification primarily of the internal elastic lamina, with varying degrees of calcification of the external elastic lamina in areas of heavy calcification, which was circumferential in many sections. Inflammation was not a prominent feature. Intraparenchymal arterial calcifications were found in the spleen, pancreas, diaphragm, thymus, thyroid, trachea, larynx, and salivary glands. Extensive intratubular calcifications were found in the kidneys. Gross examination of the brain showed mild convolutional abnormalities, and microscopy showed rare focal parenchymal calcifications and a single vessel in the corpus striatum with early calcific changes. The second patient with IIAC was an infant girl who presented at age 2 months in cardiogenic shock, and after initial recovery was readmitted in the third month of life with severe heart failure, at which time cardiac MRI showed a large anterolateral and apical aneurysm of the left ventricle, with thinning of the myocardium and moderate to severe mitral regurgitation. The patient had progressively intractable heart failure and died at 4.5 months of age. Autopsy revealed a severely enlarged heart, with severe ischemic changes in the myocardium of the left ventricle and calcification within the subendocardial area. Upon microscopic examination of the arterial system, elastic arteries showed calcification primarily of the outer elastic layers, whereas muscular arteries had preferential calcification of the media with intimal proliferation, accompanied by a foreign body giant cell reaction. These findings were present in the coronary, pulmonary, and renal arteries, as well as the aorta and its branches in the neck. The coronary arteries showed luminal obstruction with near-occlusive changes in segments. Examined veins were normal.; ; Le Boulanger et al. (2010) studied a nonconsanguineous French family in which a younger brother died of a condition 'strikingly reminiscent' of generalized arterial calcification of infancy at 15 months of age, whereas his older brother developed uncomplicated pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE; 264800) in adolescence. The younger brother had a myocardial infarction complicated by heart failure at 6 months of age; skin biopsy at 1 year of age for evaluation of a possible connective tissue disorder showed elastic fiber dystrophy, with clumped and fragmented fibers in the mid dermis, as well as calcifications on the elastic fibers and sporadically in vessel walls of the subcutis. There were no periarticular calcifications on x-ray, and serum phosphate and calcium levels were normal. At 15 months of age, he had a second, fatal MI. Autopsy showed fibrosis of the coronary arteries with calcifications involving the intima, internal elastic lamina, and media, and medium-sized arteries in the adrenal glands, pancreas, thyroid, and testes also showed extensive arterial calcification. At 28 years of age, the older brother presented for evaluation of yellowish papules on his neck; he had no cardiovascular symptoms and cardiac examination and echocardiography were normal. Skin samples from the brother with PXE showed heavy staining of mineralized mid-dermal elastic fibers, with active MGP (154870) and fetuin-A (AHSG; 138680) antibodies, and fetuin-A also showed striking staining of the subepidermal area. All arteries in autopsy samples from the brother with GACI showed the same immunohistochemical profile, as well as calcifications.
614480	Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2012) reported 10 patients from 4 consanguineous Israeli-Arab families with transient infantile hypertriglyceridemia and fatty liver. All presented with similar laboratory features between 1 and 9 months of age. Six were asymptomatic, 3 had vomiting, and 1 had poor weight gain. Initial examination showed severely enlarged livers, mild to severe fasting hypertriglyceridemia, and abnormally increased liver enzymes. Bilirubin and synthetic hepatic function were normal. Three patients also had splenomegaly. Ten patients had sonographic evidence of fatty liver, including diffuse hyperechogenicity with a fine granular pattern, and loss of portal spaces in some. Most other laboratory findings were normal, except in a pair of twins in 1 family who had additional medical problems, and 3 patients who had abnormal lipoprotein levels. Five of 9 patients tested showed mildly elevated fasting urinary dicarboxylic acids, which decreased with age. Triglyceride levels decreased in 8 individuals later in infancy or childhood, but still remained elevated in 7 patients. Two patients had liver biopsies at ages 4.5 and 2.5 years, respectively, which showed steatosis with fibrosis and septal formation. The oldest patient, who was 23 years old, was asymptomatic, with short stature, elevated liver enzymes, fatty liver, and no evidence of cardiovascular disease or pancreatitis. None of the patients were obese and none had cutaneous xanthomas. Heterozygous parents did not have increased triglyceride levels or biochemical evidence of hepatic dysfunction. Because most affected individuals were young, no conclusions could be drawn about the influence of severe childhood hypertriglyceridemia on the risk for coronary heart disease later in life.; ; Joshi et al. (2014) reported a Caucasian female infant with hepatomegaly and hypertriglyceridemia. She presented in early infancy with failure to thrive, vomiting, and an enlarged abdomen. Laboratory studies showed abnormal liver enzymes, increased plasma triglycerides, and elevated cholesterol. Liver biopsy showed diffuse steatohepatitis. She was successfully managed with a high-calorie, low-fat diet, and she showed normal development at age 1.5 years.; ; Dionisi-Vici et al. (2016) reported 4 patients from 3 families with HTGTI. Patient A presented at 10 months of age with elevated liver transaminases. He had fasting hypoglycemia beginning at 14 months of age. Additional laboratory testing demonstrated elevated triglycerides. An ultrasound showed that the liver was diffusely echogenic and mildly enlarged. He was treated with frequent feeding, cornstarch supplementation, and avoidance of fasting, which resolved the hypoglycemia episodes. His triglyceride levels normalized but an MRI at 4.5 years of age demonstrated an enlarged liver with fatty infiltration. Patient B presented at 1 year of age with an enlarged liver, elevated liver transaminases, and fatty liver on ultrasound. Laboratory testing also demonstrated triglycerides. Liver biopsy showed portal and bridging fibrosis. Serum triglycerides normalized at 4 years of age. Patient C presented at 5 months of age with an enlarged liver and an ultrasound showed increased echogenicity. Laboratory testing showed elevated triglycerides, total bile acids, and liver transaminases. A liver biopsy showed steatosis and bridging fibrosis. His uncle, patient D, had a history of an enlarged liver at 2 years of age and elevated triglycerides. A liver biopsy showed macrovesicular steatosis and portal and periportal fibrosis.; ; Tesarova et al. (2021) reported 9 Roma children and 1 Palestinian Arab boy, aged 2 to 17 years, with HTGTI. Nine of the patients presented with hepatomegaly; other presenting features included hepatopathy and hypertriglyceridemia. Clinical and laboratory features stabilized or improved in the patients, but liver biopsies showed steatofibrosis in 6 patients and signs of cirrhosis in 2 patients.; ; Wang et al. (2022) described clinical features in 31 patients with HTGTI based on a literature review. The median age of presentation was 6 months, with a median follow-up time of 4.1 years. Thirty of the patients had hypertriglyceridemia, which resolved in 6 patients on follow-up laboratory findings. Enlarged liver was seen in 29 patients, and enlarged spleen was present in 5 patients. Growth retardation and short stature were present in 22.6% of the patients. Other features included jaundice in 6.5%, cholestasis in 3.2%, and hypoglycemia in 9.7%. All of the patients had fatty liver. Liver biopsies from 15 patients showed steatosis in all 15 and hepatic fibrosis in 10.
614482	Horvath et al. (2005) reported a boy, born of consanguineous Arab parents, who presented in the first weeks of life with severe hypotonia, weakness of the neck muscles, and bilateral congenital cataracts. Examination at age 4 months showed delayed psychomotor development, severe hypotonia, inability to fix gaze, and rotary nystagmus. Laboratory studies showed low serum copper and ceruloplasmin, and neutropenia. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed some enlarged and abnormal mitochondria and decreased cytochrome c oxidase activity. Brain MRI at age 5 months revealed Dandy-Walker malformation, hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, and hypoplasia of the temporal lobes. Treatment with copper histidinate supplementation resulted in marked clinical improvement by ages 8 and 13 months: hypotonia was less severe, and there was complete restoration of cytochrome c oxidase activity in skeletal muscle, although serum copper levels did not increase significantly. At age 13 months, he was noted to have bilateral hearing impairment. Patient fibroblasts showed an increased copper uptake with normal retention. Immunoblot analysis excluded deficiencies of ATP7A (300011), which causes Menkes disease (309400), and ATP7B (606882), which causes Wilson disease (277900), 2 disorders of copper metabolism. Huppke et al. (2012) provided follow-up of the patient reported by Horvath et al. (2005), who died at age 4 years.; ; Huppke et al. (2012) reported 4 patients from 3 families with a phenotype similar to that reported in the patient by Horvath et al. (2005). All had severe psychomotor retardation, with inability to sit or walk independently and lack of speech, as well as congenital cataracts and hearing loss. Additional, more variable neurologic features included nystagmus (3) and seizures (2). Brain MRI showed cerebral and cerebellar atrophy, wide subarachnoid spaces, and hypomyelination. Serum copper was low (10 to 20% of normal), and ceruloplasmin was very low. All patients died between ages 22 months and 6 years, from various causes. Two patients treated with copper supplementation showed no clinical improvement. The patients did not show evidence of total body copper deficiency or copper toxicity.; ; Chiplunkar et al. (2016) reported a 7-month-old boy, born to first-cousin parents from India, with Huppke-Brendel syndrome. The patient had hypopigmented hair and bilateral congenital cataracts at birth. He underwent surgery for cataracts at 2 months of age. At 7 months of age, he was noted to have a full face with hypopigmented hair and skin and small male genitalia. His weight was at the 75th centile for age, while head circumference was less than the 3rd centile. He had nystagmus and significant developmental delay. Serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels were low. MRI of the brain showed hypomyelination and cerebellar hypoplasia. He died at age 10 months.; ; Monastiri et al. (2021) reported 2 brothers, born of consanguineous Tunisian parents, with Huppke-Brendel syndrome. The 1-year-old brother had cutis marmorata, recurrent pneumonia, neurologic regression, and seizures with onset at 7 months of age. Brain MRI showed cerebral atrophy, mega cisterna magna, and suspected Leigh syndrome. Serum copper was slightly elevated and plasma ceruloplasmin was low. He died at the age of 16 months. In the 5-month-old brother, mild hypotonia, horizontal nystagmus, and bilateral cataracts were noted. He had neurodevelopmental regression with recurrent aspiration pneumonia. Both serum copper and plasma ceruloplasmin were low. He was treated with enteral copper without improvement.; ; Sikic et al. (2022) reported a 3-year-old girl, born to nonconsanguineous Croatian parents, with Huppke-Brendel syndrome She had mild hypotonia and bilateral cataracts in the newborn period. At 5 months, deterioration in her development was noted, with improvement after 6 months of intensive therapies. Clinical deterioration was again noted at 14 months, when she was hospitalized due to meningitis and urosepsis. She was noted to have significant dyskinesia of the arms, head and trunk and uncoordinated eye movements. She had nystagmus. Joints were hypermobile, and facial features included hypotelorism, thin upper lip, and micrognathia. Recurrent seizures developed, leading to initiation of antiepileptic therapy. A brain MRI showed bilateral frontal subdural hygromas, cystic formation in the posterior cranial fossa, and diffuse hypomyelination and cerebellar hypoplasia. Bilateral hearing loss was identified. She had low serum copper and ceruloplasmin concentrations. Subcutaneous copper histidinate therapy was started at age 18 months with no clinical improvement, although an increase in serum copper and ceruloplasmin was noted. She was noted to have a distal femur fracture at age 3 years without preceding trauma. At her last evaluation at age 3 years and 4 months, she was microcephalic (head circumference less than 1st centile) and had pale skin and white sparse kinky hair. She had severe psychomotor disability: she was bedridden, somnolent with no visual contact, responded only to painful stimuli, was tube-fed, and used tracheostomy with noninvasive ventilation as breathing support. She continued to have daily seizures despite treatment with 3 antiepileptic medications, and an EEG shows burst suppression elements. Levels of ceruloplasmin and copper were low, despite continuous copper histidinate therapy. Although N-terminal protein acetylation and acetyl-CoA levels in fibroblasts appeared normal, the authors found decreased levels of many N-acetylated amino acids in the cerebrospinal fluid and suggested that these could be potential biomarkers for the condition. Sikic et al. (2022) also reviewed phenotype and genotype of previously reported patients with Huppke-Brendel syndrome.; ; Kirk et al. (2022) reported a 53-year-old Danish woman with a mild form of Huppke-Brendel syndrome who had previously been diagnosed with Wilson disease (277900) because of elevated urinary copper and low ceruloplasmin levels. The patient initially presented in childhood with developmental delay and partial hearing loss. At age 29 years, she had moderately impaired intellectual development, partial hearing loss, spastic ataxia, hypotonia, and a unilateral tremor of parkinsonian type. She had low serum ceruloplasmin and serum copper levels, and urinary excretion of copper was moderately elevated, and Wilson disease was diagnosed. Zinc therapy was initiated, and she remained stable, without progression of her neurologic symptoms. At 49 years of age, she developed severe dysphagia and experienced a loss of mobility and bladder and bowel control. Penicillamine was added and her antipsychotic and antiepileptic medications were adjusted, with improvement in her dysphagia and mobility. Brain MRI showed no changes consistent with Wilson disease but showed global atrophy including cerebellar atrophy. These findings, along with genetic analysis finding no variants in the ATP7B (606882) gene and identifying variants in the SLC33A1 gene, led to a diagnosis of Huppke-Brendel syndrome.
614483	Yoneda et al. (2012) reported a Japanese family with autosomal dominant inheritance of brain small vessel disease associated with porencephaly of varying severity. The proband was found to have an enlarged right lateral ventricle at age 31 weeks' gestation. He showed delayed early development, particularly of motor skills, with poor left hand use, abnormal leg movement, and delayed walking. At age 3, he showed spastic triplegia with left hemiplegic and diplegic gait. He developed seizures at age 10 months, and EEG showed focal spikes in the right frontal region, with later involvement of the right occipital to posterior temporal region and midcentral region. Brain MRI at age 6 years showed an enlarged right lateral ventricle, reduced volume of the right frontal white matter, and atrophic right cerebral peduncle and body of corpus callosum. IQ was 74. His mother had focal seizures at age 18 months, which were well-controlled. She had clumsiness of the left hand in later childhood, as well as transient headaches. At age 31 years, she had very mild monoparesis of the left upper extremity. Brain MRI showed a mildly enlarged right lateral ventricle, and evidence of mild porencephaly or periventricular venous infarction around the enlarged ventricular wall on FLAIR imaging. The proband's maternal uncle and maternal granduncle also had a history of congenital hemiplegia, suggesting a genetic predisposition in the family. A second unrelated Japanese proband was severely affected. He had low APGAR scores and mild asphyxia at birth. Brain ultrasound showed a parenchymal hemorrhage of the right cerebral hemisphere with an enlarged left lateral ventricle. He also showed a coagulation defect, with increased PT and APTT, and received fresh frozen plasma. The coagulation defect normalized at age 7 months. At age 37 days, he had a ventricular shunt placed for progressive enlargement of the lateral ventricles. CT scan at age 2 months showed extremely reduced white matter in the frontal lobes. At age 1 year, 4 months, he had spastic quadriplegia and very poor development. An elder sister had an intraventricular hemorrhage 2 days after birth and underwent ventriculoperitoneal shunting. Her development was almost normal, although internal strabismus was noted. However, she died in an accident at the age of 4 years, and DNA was unavailable.; ; Cavallin et al. (2018) reported 2 unrelated children, 4 and 11 years of age, with BSVD2. The patients were ascertained from a cohort of patients with cortical malformations. Both had small head circumference (-2 SD), and severe global developmental delay with no language and spastic tetraplegia; 1 had poor overall growth and a feeding tube. One had onset of refractory seizures at 5 months of age; the other had controlled focal seizures. Ophthalmologic examination showed normal fundus in both children, but 1 had intermittent eye fixation and small/tilted optic discs, and the other had esotropia. Brain imaging showed various abnormalities in both patients, including schizencephaly, polymicrogyria, pachygyria, and subcortical and subependymal nodular heterotopia. There were no signs of previous hemorrhage or calcifications.; ; Zagaglia et al. (2018) reviewed the epileptic seizure phenotype among patients with COL4A2 mutations, noting that most patients have focal onset associated with localization of porencephaly.
614486	Ohlin and Marlar (1995) reported a 45-year-old Hispanic man with thrombophilia who developed a pulmonary embolism. He had decreased soluble THBD fragments in serum compared to controls. His mother had died suddenly, apparently of pulmonary embolus.
614487	Pierson et al. (2011) reported 2 brothers, born of consanguineous Hispanic parents from Colombia, with early-onset spinocerebellar ataxia with spasticity and myoclonic epilepsy. Their disease courses were similar, although the younger sib had a more severe phenotype and died of pneumonia at age 13 years. The older brother developed spastic gait at age 2 years and eventually lost the ability to ambulate independently, whereas the younger brother never acquired independent ambulation. Both developed progressive myoclonic epilepsy associated with generalized tonic-clonic seizures at age 8 years. This was followed by progressive dysarthria, dysphagia, motor degeneration, and lower extremity weakness with distal muscle atrophy. The older brother showed dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesia, ataxic dysarthria, ptosis, oculomotor apraxia, and dystonic movements. Cognition was normal. Brain MRI showed moderate cerebellar atrophy, and nerve conduction studies showed an axonal sensorimotor neuropathy of the lower extremities. Electron microscopy of skeletal muscle showed misplaced mitochondria associated with large lipid droplets, and there was decreased mtDNA copy number. Both parents were without neurologic complaints and had normal neurologic and ophthalmological exams, although the mother had mild cerebellar atrophy on brain imaging.; ; Franchino et al. (2024) reported a girl (patient 2) with SPAX5 who had gait instability and ataxia at 3 years of age. A brain MRI showed abnormal signal in the globus pallidus and the cerebellar peduncles. She developed progressive dysmetria, dysarthria, and pyramidal signs. At 6 years of age, she had seizures and myoclonic bursts.; ; Muona et al. (2015) reported 2 Italian patients, not known to be related, who presented with severe progressive myoclonus at age 10 years after normal early development. One patient had a single tonic-clonic seizure, ataxia, and mild cognitive decline. He was wheelchair-bound at age 22 years. The other patient had a single tonic-clonic seizure at age 22, ataxia, and mild cognitive impairment. She became wheelchair-bound at age 48 years. Neither patient had early spasticity or neuropathy. Muona et al. (2015) noted that the phenotype in these 2 patients was not as severe as that reported by Pierson et al. (2011).; ; Caporali et al. (2020) reported 2 unrelated patients (families 6 and 11) with SPAX5 associated with optic atrophy. They had impaired vision, color vision deficits, photophobia, pale optic discs, and decreased thickness of the retinal nerve fiber layer. These patients also had ataxia, spasticity, myoclonus, chorea, dystonia, and cerebellar signs. The report expanded the phenotypic spectrum associated with biallelic AFG3L2 mutations. Molecular studies identified compound heterozygous mutations in the AFG3L2 gene (604581.0014-604581.0015, 604581.0018-604581.0019).
614490	Nakajima and Ito (1978) reported a 30-year-old Japanese woman with no history of blood transfusion whose child developed hemolytic disease of the newborn. The infant became jaundiced within 3 days of birth, and blood showed a strongly positive direct antiglobulin reaction. The maternal serum was found to contain anti-Jr(a) IgG antibodies. Red cells of the baby and the father carried the Jr(a) antigen, whereas those of the mother did not. The mother had a previous history of spontaneous abortion at 3 months' gestation.; ; Peyrard et al. (2008) reported fatal hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn associated with anti-Jr(a) antibodies. Prenatal ultrasound of a 28-year-old Caucasian woman of Gypsy Spanish origin at 29 weeks' gestation pregnancy showed fetal cardiomegaly and hepatomegaly. She had a history of 2 abortions and 1 full-term pregnancy, as well as a history of massive transfusion with Jr(a)-positive blood. In this pregnancy, an emergency cesarean section was performed at 36 weeks' gestation; the newborn was hydropic with severe anemia and died 30 hours after birth. The mother was found to have the Jr(a-) phenotype with anti-Jr(a) antibodies. Peyrard et al. (2008) stated that this was the first documented case of fatal hemolytic disease of the fetus or newborn due to anti-Jr(a), which provided new information about the clinical significance of anti-Jr(a).; ; Kim et al. (2010) reported a 33-year-old nulliparous Korean woman with no history of transfusion who had the Jr(a-) red blood cell phenotype and anti-Jr(a) IgG antibodies. She delivered male twins with the Jr(a) phenotype, and circulating maternal Jr(a) antibodies were detected in the babies' serum. The twins had mild hemolytic disease of the newborn, which was successfully treated with phototherapy; they had no further complications.
614491	Farfel et al. (1978, 1978) described an Ashkenazi Jewish family in which some members had hyperkalemia (6-7 mEq/L) evident in childhood and hypertension that developed later in life. The patients had mild acidosis of the proximal renal tubular acidosis type. Chlorothiazide administration promptly corrected all features. The syndrome affected 7 members of 3 generations with instances of male-to-male transmission, thus indicating autosomal dominant inheritance. Investigations showed normal renal and adrenal function. Aldosterone concentrations were normal, but probably inappropriately low for the level of hyperkalemia. Renin was low. A low-salt diet reduced blood pressure and urinary sodium (in contrast to the salt loss that occurs in pseudohypoaldosteronism) but serum potassium did not change. Aldosterone administration caused the expected decrease in urinary sodium but no increase in urinary potassium, supporting a mechanism of resistance to aldosterone regarding potassium but not sodium transport. Infusion of insulin produced hypoglycemia but no substantial reduction in serum potassium in 3 patients studied. Farfel et al. (1978) suggested the existence of a generalized cellular defect in transmembrane potassium transport (in which the kidneys, of course, participate) rather than an isolated renal tubular abnormality.; ; In the family reported by Lee et al. (1979) and Lee and Morgan (1980), 2 generations were affected.
614492	Disse-Nicodeme et al. (2000) analyzed a large French pedigree in which 12 affected members over 3 generations confirmed autosomal dominant inheritance. Affected subjects had hypertension together with long-term hyperkalemia (range, 5.2-6.2 mmol/liter), hyperchloremia (range, 100-109 mmol/liter), normal plasma creatinine, and low renin (179820) levels.; ; Wilson et al. (2001) studied a new PHAII kindred that included 10 living members with typical features of PHAII, including hypertension, hyperkalemia (mean serum potassium, 6.2 mM), normal glomerular filtration rate, suppressed plasma renin activity, normal or elevated aldosterone levels, hyperchloremia (mean serum chloride, 112 mM), and reduced bicarbonate (mean serum bicarbonate, 17.5 mM). These features were absent in unaffected kindred members, and inheritance of the trait was consistent with autosomal dominant transmission with high penetrance.
614493	Lanzi et al. (2012) reported an 11-day-old female Moroccan infant with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome-2. She was born to consanguineous parents who had previously lost a daughter at age 4 months with recurrent infections. The WAS2 patient presented with features of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, including recurrent infections, eczema, and thrombocytopenia. Immunologic analysis showed low numbers of B cells and T cells, particularly CD8 (see 186910)-positive T cells. The number and percentage of natural killer (NK) cells were increased, but NK-cell functional activity was drastically reduced. Patient T cells showed normal proliferation in response to PHA, but showed no response to anti-CD3. IL2 (147680) corrected the partial proliferation defect in T cells from a WAS patient, but it failed to correct the complete T-cell proliferation defect in the WAS2 patient. WAS2 patient T cells also showed absent migration in response to IP10 (CXCL10; 147310); this was associated with poor expression of IP10 receptor (CXCR3; 300574). Platelet volume was normal. Unrelated cord blood transplantation at age 4.5 months restored immunologic function, and the WAS2 patient was healthy 16 months after the procedure.; ; Al-Mousa et al. (2017) reported 4 patients from a multigenerational consanguineous Saudi Arabian kindred with WAS2. All presented in the first weeks or months of life with recurrent infections, including ear infections, bloody diarrhea, and CMV pneumonitis, eczema, and thrombocytopenia with normal platelet volume. Laboratory studies showed decreased T cells, particularly CD8+ T cells, low-normal B and NK cells, and variably increased IgE and IgA. All underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, which was successful in 3 of the children. The fourth patient died of complications. Family history was significant for several other related children who died early in life with a similar disorder.
614495	Boyden et al. (2012) studied a cohort of 52 PHAII kindreds including 126 affected subjects with renal hyperkalemia and otherwise normal renal function; hypertension and acidosis were present in 71% and 82%, respectively. Among these 52 kindreds, 8 kindreds including 14 individuals carried recessive mutations in KLHL3, and 16 kindreds including 40 individuals carried dominant mutations. The phenotype of patients carrying either type of mutation was similar. The mean age at diagnosis or referral among patients with recessive mutations was 26 +/- 14 years. They had a mean potassium at time of diagnosis of 6.8 +/- 0.5; mean bicarbonate was 17.6 +/- 1.5; and only 14% had developed hypertension by 18 years of age. Among the patients with dominant mutations, mean age at diagnosis or referral was 24 +/- 18 years, mean potassium 6.2 +/- 0.6 mM, and mean bicarbonate 17.2 +/- 2.5; 17% had hypertension diagnosed by age 18 years.
614496	Boyden et al. (2012) studied a cohort of 52 PHAII kindreds, including 126 affected subjects with renal hyperkalemia and otherwise normal renal function; hypertension and acidosis were present in 71% and 82%, respectively. They detected 21 affected individuals from 17 kindreds with mutation in the CUL3 gene. The mean age at diagnosis or referral was 9 +/- 6 years, mean potassium was 7.5 +/- 0.9, and mean bicarbonate was 15.5 +/- 2.0. Hypertension was present in 94% of patients at or before 18 years of age. The CUL3 mutation patients had by far the most severe manifestations of PHAII compared to patients with other mutations.
614498	Puffenberger et al. (2012) reported 3 patients from 3 different Amish sibships in Pennsylvania with a lethal neonatal neurologic disorder. Episodic jerking was apparent in utero. At birth, affected individuals had small heads (1.5-2.0 SD below normal), overlapping cranial sutures, small or absent fontanels, and depressed frontal bones. The hands were fisted and there was extreme axial and limb rigidity. The infants showed poorly responsive focal jerks of the tongue, face and arms in a nearly continuous sequence throughout life. Neuroimaging was normal or showed mild hypoplasia of the frontal lobes. Electroencephalograms (EEGs) were characterized by bilateral medium-high voltage spikes over the temporal and central regions, frequent multifocal seizures, background slowing, and no posterior rhythm. The infants made no developmental progress, and all died of cardiopulmonary arrest before age 4 months. Neuropathologic examination of the brain of 1 child showed neuronal loss with microglial reaction primarily in the striatum and cerebral cortex, consistent with corticobasal degeneration.; ; Saunders et al. (2012) reported a female infant from a consanguineous Mexican family with onset of intractable seizures 1 hour after birth. EEG showed focal epileptiform and sharp wave activity; brain imaging was normal. At 5 weeks of age, she had some dysmorphic features, including bitemporal narrowing, micrognathia, flat nasal bridge, upslanted palpebral fissures, and uplifted earlobes with redundant helices. She had hypertonia, hyperreflexia, persistence of cortical thumbs, clonus, and facial twitching. Respiratory support was withdrawn and the patient died in infancy. Two cousins reportedly died of intractable epilepsy in early infancy.; ; Straussberg et al. (2015) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Arab parents, who presented with apneic episodes, interpreted to be seizures, on the first day of life. Other features included hypertonicity, scissoring, hyperreflexia, and upper limb contractures. Both patients developed intractable myoclonic seizures associated with EEG abnormalities. Brain imaging was normal in both patients. Neither achieved developmental milestones, and both died of cardiopulmonary arrest at 5 and 6 months of age.; ; Saitsu et al. (2014) reported 2 Japanese sisters, born of unrelated parents, with lethal neonatal rigidity and seizures. At or soon after birth, both patients were noted to have muscle hypertonia and dysmorphic facies, including round face, thin lips, and large ears in 1 patient. Both infants developed various intractable seizures, including tonic-clonic and myoclonic seizures, as well as apneic attacks. EEG showed a suppression-burst pattern in both patients, consistent with epileptic encephalopathy. Both patients also showed cerebral and cerebellar atrophy, a progressive decrease in head circumference, and optic atrophy. Neither achieved any developmental milestones, and they died at ages 3 months and 1 year. Brain imaging showed delayed myelination of the cerebral white matter in 1 patient. Postmortem examination of 1 patient showed neuronal loss in the cortex and cerebellum, moderate gliosis, and no myelination of the frontal lobes. The brainstem was relatively well preserved.; ; Van de Pol et al. (2015) reported 3 sibs, born of consanguineous Moroccan parents, with infantile onset of epileptic encephalopathy resulting in death between 2 and 17 months of age. Features included axial hypotonia, appendicular hypertonia, microcephaly, intractable seizures, absent development, severely abnormal EEG, and global brain atrophy. EEG showed abnormal background pattern, with multifocal sharp waves, frequent multifocal epileptic seizure activity, and burst-suppression pattern. Detailed neuropathologic examination performed on 1 infant showed global atrophy, enlarged ventricles, and thin corpus callosum. The neocortex showed normal 6-layer architecture, but there was a loss of neurons and intense reactive gliosis. Other findings included hippocampal sclerosis and neuronal loss and gliosis in the brainstem and cerebellum. The clinical features were similar to those reported by Puffenberger et al. (2012), and the patients reported by van de Pol et al. (2015) carried the same homozygous frameshift mutation in the BRAT1 gene (614506.0001).; ; In a review of 97 patients with biallelic mutations in BRAT1, Engel et al. (2023) reported clinical features of 59 patients, 31 newly reported, with RMFSL from 45 families. Prenatal findings included abnormal movements in 14 patients, intrauterine growth retardation in 9 patients, polyhydramnios in 2 patients, and oligohydramnios in 2 patients. Fourteen patients had congenital microcephaly, 8 had axial hypotonia, and 16 had peripheral hypertonia. None of the patients acquired any psychomotor milestones. Fifty-five of the patients died, at a median age of 113 days. All of the patients had epilepsy, which started at a median age of 1 day. Brain MRI findings included cerebral atrophy in 31 patients, cerebellar atrophy in 14 patients, abnormalities of the corpus callosum in 13 patients, and delayed myelination in 12 patients. Dysmorphic features included micrognathia, round face, low-set ears, bulbous nose, and thick lips. Less common clinical features included cardiac anomalies in 7 patients and clubfoot in 4 patients.; ; Srivastava et al. (2016) reported a 15-month-old boy (patient 4), born of unrelated parents, with RMFSL who was still alive at the time of the report. He presented at birth with hypertonia and mild microcephaly, but developed head control and could sit and smile at 1 year of age. He developed refractory seizures associated with status epilepticus at age 4 months. Additional features included cortical visual impairment, dysphasia requiring G-tube placement, axial hypotonia, spasticity, and dysmorphic features, such as downslanting palpebral fissures, supraorbital fullness, flattened nose, low-set ears, and dry skin. Brain imaging showed mild cerebral volume loss, but normal cerebellum. Whole-exome sequencing identified compound heterozygous mutations in the BRAT1 gene (L140P, 614506.0009 and c.171delG, 614506.0010). The findings suggested a phenotypic spectrum associated with biallelic BRAT1 mutations.; ; Horn et al. (2016) reported 2 brothers, born of unrelated German parents, with RMFSL. One of the patients died at 2 months of age, whereas the other survived until almost 6 years of age. The infant who died at 2 months had classic features of the disorder, including neonatal onset of intractable seizures, feeding problems, increased muscle tone, recurrent apnea, and contractures. EEG showed diffuse slowing, bilateral spikes, a burst-suppression pattern, and focal status epilepticus. He did not reach any developmental milestones. The patient who survived developed intractable myoclonic seizures at 4 months of age, had axial hypotonia and appendicular hypertonia, was able to roll over, and had minimal head control, but did not progress from there. He also had contractures, impaired central vision, and no speech. Brain imaging showed thin corpus callosum, enlarged CSF spaces, and delayed myelination. Muscle biopsy showed immature myofibers and a severe reduction in cytochrome C oxidase levels, suggesting mitochondrial dysfunction. Targeted sequencing identified compound heterozygous mutations in the BRAT1 gene, c.638dupA (614506.0001) and a splice site mutation (c.1134+1G-A), which were confirmed by Sanger sequencing and segregated with the disorder in the family. Functional studies of the variants were not performed, but analysis of the father's fibroblasts (with the splice site mutation) showed a 40% reduction in BRAT1 expression compared to controls, suggesting a loss of function. The findings expanded the phenotypic spectrum of RMFSL even within the same family.
614499	Puffenberger et al. (2012) reported 5 Mennonite patients with nonsyndromic impaired intellectual development. Affected individuals had mildly delayed development and significantly impaired cognitive function, precluding independent living and self-care. Speech was rudimentary, but articulate; autism was not present. Di Donato et al. (2016) found that 3 of the patients reported by Puffenberger et al. (2012) had brain imaging findings consistent with 'thin' lissencephaly; the cerebellum was normal.; ; Di Donato et al. (2016) reported 6 patients from 4 unrelated families with MRT34 ascertained by the finding of 'thin' lissencephaly on brain imaging. The patients ranged in age from 13 to 51 years. Brain imaging showed frontal predominant symmetric pachygyria with reduced numbers of gyri, shallow sulci, and mildly thickened cortex (5-7 mm). Brainstem and cerebellum were normal. One patient had a mild Chiari malformation. Di Donato et al. (2016) stated that the family previously reported by Puffenberger et al. (2012) (LR15-293) had 7 affected individuals. Of the 13 reported patients, all 13 had mildly to moderately impaired intellectual development with poor speech and language, 12 had enlarged head circumference, and 3 had seizures. Most of the patients attended special education classes but were unable to live independently.; ; Polla et al. (2019) reported 22 Finnish patients with autosomal recessive intellectual developmental disorder-34 with variant lissencephaly from 15 families, all with the same homozygous variant in the CRADD gene. Mildly to moderately impaired intellectual development was present in 21 patients, and 1 patient, aged 4 years, had global developmental delay; all had early psychomotor development but markedly delayed language development. Five patients showed EEG abnormalities, with 2 having epilepsy. Strabismus and visual problems were present in 9 patients, and distractibility or hyperactive behavior was present in 7 patients. Ten patients had neuropsychiatric problems with aggressive bursts. No issues with growth or common dysmorphic features were seen. One patient had megalencephaly, whereas head circumference in the other patients was in the normal range. Brain imaging was available for 19 patients and showed frontotemporal predominant pachygyria and mild cortical thickening. The authors emphasized the wide phenotypic variability among patients with the same pathogenic variant and the importance of brain imaging studies to confirm the diagnosis.
614500	Estrada-Cuzcano et al. (2012) studied 4 unrelated consanguineous families with retinal dystrophy. Four patients from 2 families were diagnosed with cone-rod dystrophy, and 2 patients from 2 families were diagnosed with retinitis pigmentosa with early macular involvement. Age at presentation ranged from infancy to late teens. The patients all showed early involvement of the macula, resulting in loss of central vision at an early age: none had visual acuity better than 20/60 and 1 patient had light perception only. All showed attenuation of retinal vessels, and the CORD patients had temporal optic disc pallor and some pigment clumping, whereas the RP patients had bone spicule-like pigmentation and waxy optic disc. Rod and cone patterns were nonrecordable by electroretinography (ERG) in the 2 RP patients and in 2 of the CORD patients; in the other 2 CORD patients, the cone pattern was nonrecordable and the rod recording was severely reduced. A brother and sister with CORD also had postaxial polydactyly: each had an extra finger or toe on the right hand or foot, respectively.; ; Ravesh et al. (2015) reported 5 individuals with isolated RP from 2 unrelated families (MA13 and MA48) of Pakistani origin. All affected individuals had early-onset RP with moderate to severe loss of visual acuity between the second and third decades of life. Full-field ERG was unrecordable in the proband from family MA13, and 1 patient from family MA48 had sluggish pupillary reactions consistent with a severe form of RP with a minimally functioning retina. No extraocular manifestations were observed in the examined patients.; ; Katagiri et al. (2016) described a Japanese brother and sister who had loss of visual acuity during childhood. On initial examination at ages 43 years and 37 years, respectively, both patients showed severely decreased visual acuity, high myopia, chorioretinal degeneration with macular atrophy, severely constricted visual fields, and nonrecordable ERG responses. In addition, the sister had severe nuclear cataracts and the brother had nuclear and subcapsular cataracts. The retinal degeneration and visual field constriction progressed during follow-up. Neither patient exhibited obesity, polydactyly, renal dysfunction, cardiovascular disorders, hyperlipidemia, or impaired glucose tolerance. Katagiri et al. (2016) stated that this early-onset retinal dystrophy could not be classified as either RP or CORD because of the severe retinal degeneration at initial presentation and because loss of visual acuity and night blindness were reported to have occurred in the same period of childhood.; ; Rahner et al. (2016) reported 2 sisters of Moroccan origin who had CORD with postaxial polydactyly but no other features of BBS. Impaired vision was first noted at 5 to 6 years of age, and ERGs in the second decade of life showed absent cone response with markedly reduced rod response. Pattern visual evoked potentials indicated severely reduced macular function, and color vision was markedly impaired. Optical coherence tomography showed bilateral severe thinning of the macula. Funduscopy in the older sister revealed a pale optic disc, mildly attenuated retinal vessels, atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, and spicule-like pigmentation deposits in the periphery. In the younger sister, only sporadic round pigmentary changes in the periphery were observed. The older sister also exhibited postaxial polydactyly of both feet and the left hand, whereas the younger sister had postaxial polydactyly only of the left foot.
614501	Puffenberger et al. (2012) reported 3 Amish patients, including 2 brothers, with severe psychomotor retardation, intractable seizures, dysmorphic features, and a 'lumpy' skull surface. Patients were hypotonic and had poor feeding in the neonatal period. They had severe developmental delay with an inability to speak or walk independently. All developed focal or generalized intractable seizures by age 6 months associated with multifocal spike-wave discharges on EEG. Seizures were manifest as dystonic posturing, drop attacks, myoclonic jerks, or generalized tonic-clonic events. Dysmorphic features evolved over time and included a bulbous nose, wide mouth and tongue, broad jaw, short hands, short tapered fingers, and broad thumbs. Other features included hypotonia, strabismus, slow horizontal nystagmus, and weak or absent tendon reflexes. Brain MRI showed ventriculomegaly, thin corpus callosum, white matter abnormalities, and an undulating or 'lumpy' skull surface. The cortical ribbon followed the irregular skull contour. Other variable physical anomalies included subglottic stenosis, aortic stenosis, bicuspid aortic valve, umbilical hernia, and hydrocele.; ; Ammous et al. (2021) reported the clinical features of 35 Amish individuals with NEDHCS, some of whom had been reported by Puffenberger et al. (2012). The authors identified a total of 51 Old Amish patients with the disorder, confirmed by genetic analysis (49 patients) or by conclusive family history (2 patients). The patients, who ranged in age from 1 month to 26 years, presented in infancy with global developmental delay, hypotonia with poor or absent reflexes, dysmorphic facial features, and skull abnormalities. They showed intrauterine growth retardation and poor feeding with failure to thrive, sometimes requiring tube feeding. Upper respiratory difficulties, such as weak cry, stridor, and apnea, were also commonly observed in the neonatal period. Most achieved independent ambulation between 3 and 10 years, and some communicated with signs, sounds, or gestures, but language development in general was poor or absent. About 75% had behavioral abnormalities, including autism, hyperactivity, irritability, and sleep disturbances. All had early-onset seizures of various types, including focal, generalized, myoclonic, absence, tonic-clonic, and breath-holding spells. EEG findings were nonspecific with no characteristic pattern. The seizures were difficult to treat; some patients had intractable seizures or regression after episodes of status epilepticus. Dysmorphic features included craniosynostosis with irregular skull shape and surface, midface hypoplasia, wide mouth with downturned corners and thin tented upper lip, large tongue, high-arched palate, microretrognathia, small upturned nose, long palpebral fissures, and proptosis. Less common features included short hands with tapering fingers, spinal abnormalities, such as scoliosis or tethered cord, hernias, and talipes equinovarus. Strabismus, myopia, and nystagmus were also observed. Auditory features included chronic otitis media and hearing loss, with 20% of newborns failing the newborn hearing screen. Brain imaging in all 18 patients studied showed various abnormalities, including hydrocephalus, ventriculomegaly, white matter abnormalities, irregular cortical ribbon, thin corpus callosum, hypomyelination, absence of the septum pellucidum, Chiari malformation, hypoplastic optic nerves, and septooptic dysplasia. Some patients had involvement of other systems, including variable congenital cardiac defects (60% of patients), gastroesophageal reflux, or rare endocrine abnormalities, such as hypoglycemia or hypothyroidism.
614504	Puffenberger et al. (2012) studied Usher syndrome patients from Old Order Amish families in Pennsylvania. Growth and development were normal during infancy. Visual impairment became evident during early childhood with the emergence of fine horizontal nystagmus, light aversion, and optic pallor. Funduscopic changes included marked attenuation of retinal vessels, cellophane-like reflex that produces a 'bull's eye' macula, and diffuse pigmentary stippling of the peripheral retina, consistent with retinitis pigmentosa. Patients were typically blind by the second or third decade of life, but the pace of visual deterioration was highly variable. Although no auditory data were available from newborns, some auditory function was present during infancy and deteriorated during early childhood, with all evoked auditory waveforms being absent by age 5. Amplifiers or cochlear implants partially restored hearing. Patients had delayed gross motor development, hyperactive patellar tendon reflexes, mild truncal ataxia, and a wide-based gait, but upper limb coordination and reflexes, peripheral nerve function, strength, tone, and intelligence were normal. Puffenberger et al. (2012) stated that the condition was most consistent with the type III variant of Usher syndrome, characterized by progressive vision and hearing loss during early childhood.; ; Puffenberger et al. (2012) reported that the so-called 'Charles Bonnet syndrome,' involving decreased visual acuity and vivid visual hallucinations, occurred in some Usher syndrome patients from Old Order Amish families in Pennsylvania. The attacks, which were precipitated by infectious illnesses, began during early childhood and were sometimes accompanied by nonsensical speech, inappropriate laughter, repetitive eye blinking, or psychomotor agitation. In 1 case, acute psychosis merged into a deep catatonia that lasted several days. Hallucinations typically responded to antipsychotic medications and were sometimes associated with transient myopathy. Rarely, children died suddenly and unexpectedly during an illness, presumably from a cardiac event, but routine electrocardiogram and 24-hour Holter monitoring results were normal.
614507	Jones et al. (2012) reported a 6-month-old boy of European descent who presented with failure to thrive, gastroesophageal reflux, developmental delay, ear infections, and oromotor dysfunction. At age 1 year, he showed hypotonia, external strabismus, mild to moderate liver dysfunction, and constipation. He had delayed psychomotor development with walking acquired at age 3 years, and never developed speech. Laboratory studies at age 6 years showed a deficiency of coagulation factors factor XI (F9; 300746), antithrombin III (SERPINC1; 107300), protein C (PROC; 612283), and protein S (PROS1; 176880). Brain MRI suggested disordered myelination. He also had slightly advanced bone age and mild osteopenia. At age 7 years, he had 2 episodes of tremors affecting the extremities that were not clearly associated with loss of consciousness. Biochemical analysis of transferrin revealed a type 1 pattern in which both monoglycosylated and aglycosylated transferrin were markedly increased.
614508	Depienne et al. (2011) and Depienne et al. (2012) reported a large 4-generation French family in which 8 individuals had congenital mirror movements. Affected individuals had involuntary mirror movements affecting the hands and forearms, resulting in functional disability in fine manual activities, and in pain and cramping during sustained manual activities, including writing. The disorder showed a stable course, and none required treatment. There were no associated disorders. An unrelated German family with 2 affected individuals had a similar phenotype.; ; Franz et al. (2015) reported a family (family A) in which at least 11 individuals spanning 3 generations had mirror movements. Eight patients had visually confirmed mirror movements, 2 were reportedly affected according to family history, and 1 patient (patient IV.6, aged 30) did not have visually apparent mirroring, but did show subtle mirror movements detected by an accelerometer glove. In this family, those with visually apparent mirror movements had 'actual' mirroring, in which the non-volitional hand and fingers virtually mirrored the volitional hand precisely in all movements.; ; Trouillard et al. (2016) reported a multigenerational family from Norway in which 8 individuals had congenital mirror movements. Four mutation carriers had obvious mirror movements in the hands that disturbed activities of daily living, whereas the other 4 mutation carriers had no complaints despite mild mirror movements, indicating intrafamilial variability.
614514	Comp et al. (1984) reported 2 brothers with thrombophilia associated with homozygous protein S deficiency. Both had recurrent venous thromboses beginning in their teenage years. Laboratory studies showed no detectable protein S activity in either brother, whereas both asymptomatic parents had activities that were 15% and 30% of normal. Free protein S in the patients was essentially absent, although there was detectable protein S complexed to C4BPA (120830).; ; Kamiya et al. (1986) observed affected persons in 3 generations of a Japanese kindred, including several persons of consanguineous parentage who had severe deficiency of protein S and were presumably homozygous for the defect.; ; Autosomal recessive protein C deficiency (612304) has been described as the basis of neonatal purpura fulminans. Mahasandana et al. (1990) described neonatal purpura fulminans in a female Thai infant with homozygous protein S deficiency. Although there was no family history of thrombotic tendency and the parents were not known to be related, there were only trace amounts of free protein S in blood samples from the parents in initial studies. Pung-amritt et al. (1999) provided follow-up on the patient reported by Mahasandana et al. (1990). She had presented at age 10 days with neonatal purpura fulminans and later developed disseminated intravascular coagulation, which responded to cryoprecipitate transfusion. She was found to have endophthalmitis and was blind, suggesting retinal vessel thrombosis in utero. Protein S was almost undetectable in the patient's plasma.; ; Bosson et al. (1995) described multiple thromboembolic venous occlusive complications in an 8-day-old infant who developed microthrombosis of the skin, superficial venous thrombosis, and deep venous thrombosis of the leg with a pulmonary embolism.; ; Mintz-Hittner et al. (1999) described vitreoretinal findings similar to severe retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) in 2 sibs with complete protein S deficiency born at 40 and 34 weeks' gestation, respectively. Both parents had heterozygous protein S deficiency. Normal vasculogenesis was interrupted in both children, and only 1 of the 4 eyes retained functional vision. A normal-appearing posterior retina, normal scotopic and photopic flash electroretinograms (ERGs), and a normal flash visual evoked response were documented from the left eye of the son at 62 weeks' adjusted age. The other 3 eyes had inoperable retinal detachments and no functional vision. Mintz-Hittner et al. (1999) concluded that patients with homozygous or compound heterozygous protein S deficiency might present as infants with severe ROP.; ; Fischer et al. (2010) reported an Albanian infant who presented on the fourth day of life with seizures and hemorrhagic shock associated with a massive intracranial bleed and laboratory evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation. After stabilization, laboratory studies showed thrombophilia due to severe protein S deficiency (less than 10% activity). The infant later developed acute arterial thrombosis of the aorta and died on the eighth day of life. Postmortem examination showed diffuse thromboses of intracerebral capillaries, suggesting that the underlying prothrombotic condition resulted in hemorrhage.
614519	Jeanne et al. (2012) reported 4 unrelated patients with adult-onset hemorrhagic stroke associated with heterozygous mutations in the COL4A2 gene (120090.0003-120090.0005). One patient was a 72-year-old white man with probable CAA (605714)-related ICH in the right occipital lobe. He had no family history of ICH, and was not taking aspirin or an anticoagulant at the time of his hemorrhage. The second was a 72-year-old white woman with a history of hypertension who developed hemorrhage in the left basal ganglia while taking aspirin. There was no family history of ICH. The third affected individual was a 45-year-old Hispanic man with a history of hypertension who developed hemorrhage in the left basal ganglia. He was not taking aspirin or anticoagulant at the time of his hemorrhage. Two sisters of this patient had ICH, although they were not available for study. The last patient was a 69-year-old African American man with probable CAA-related ICH in the right occipital lobe. He was not taking aspirin or anticoagulant at the time of his hemorrhage, and had no family history of ICH.; ; Weng et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated patients with adult-onset hemorrhagic stroke associated with heterozygous mutations in the COL4A1 gene (120130.0015 and 120130.0016). One was a 73-year-old Hispanic woman who presented with a generalized tonic-clonic seizure followed by left-sided weakness in the setting of oral warfarin anticoagulation therapy for aortic valve replacement. CT showed a small right temporal ICH and MRI identified lobar microbleeds, consistent with a diagnosis of probable CAA. The second patient was a 55-year-old man of European-American ancestry who presented with a large right putamen ICH causing acute-onset left arm, face, and leg weakness, and depressed consciousness. Medical history was significant for hypertension, type 2 diabetes and low-dose aspirin use. The scenario was consistent with a diagnosis of probable hypertensive hemorrhage.
614521	Mead et al. (2012) reported a 3-generation family with autosomal dominant inheritance of thrombocythemia. The proband presented at age 53 years with an ischemic cerebrovascular event associated with long-standing thrombocytosis (700 x 10(9) to 970 x 10(9)). There were 5 additional family members with thrombocytosis, including 1 with a myocardial infarction at age 46 and another with a myocardial infarction at age 65 and an ischemic cerebrovascular event at age 72. Bone marrow biopsy showed megakaryocyte hyperplasia without fibrosis. In addition, none of the patients had splenomegaly or evidence of leukemic transformation.
614524	Tompson et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated probands with fibrochondrogenesis who died at birth. The first patient was born of first-cousin parents of Saudi Arabian descent; the couple previously had an affected child and 2 unaffected children. The clinical phenotype consisted of midface hypoplasia with a small nose and anteverted nares, significant shortening of all limb segments with relatively normal hands and feet, and a small thorax with protuberant abdomen. Radiographs showed characteristic findings of fibrochondrogenesis, including severe shortening of the long bones with very widened metaphyses, moderate platyspondyly, delayed ossification of the cervical vertebral bodies, ischia, and pubis, short-cupped ribs giving a bell-shaped appearance to the thorax, and small ilia with irregular metaphysis. The second patient, who was the offspring of a nonconsanguineous phenotypically normal couple, displayed the typical facial features of fibrochondrogenesis, including a relatively large skull with a wide anterior fontanel, midface hypoplasia with a small nose and anteverted nares, and micrognathia. In addition, there was significant shortening of all limb segments with relatively normal hands and feet, and a small thorax with protuberant abdomen. Radiographs showed platyspondyly, shortening of the long bones with widened metaphyses, a bell-shaped thorax and short ribs with metaphyseal cupping, and hypoplastic ischia, pubis, and ilia. A lateral view of the spine showed posteriorly narrowed vertebral bodies consistent with fibrochondrogenesis.
614541	Fryns et al. (1977) reported an infant with an interstitial 16q21 deletion associated with craniofacial anomalies, cranial suture diastasis, and a narrow thorax who died at age 1 month of pneumonia. Postmortem examination showed intestinal malrotation and a ventricular septal defect. A review of this patient by Fujiwara et al. (1992) noted low birth weight, failure to thrive, hypotonia, and poor suck. The patient reported by Fryns et al. (1977) also had a large anterior fontanel, high forehead, prominent metopic suture, broad nasal bridge, hypertelorism, low-set abnormal ears, small upslanted palpebral fissures, micrognathia, short neck, and broad toes.; ; Rivera et al. (1985) reported an infant with a de novo interstitial deletion of chromosome 16q21-q23. He had very low birth weight and length, small head, joint contractures, and poor suck. Dysmorphic features included relatively large skull with brachycephaly, high forehead, prominent metopic suture, hypertelorism, small nose with flat bridge, long philtrum, thin lips, micrognathia, arched palate, low-set ears, short neck, and brachydactyly. Cardiac examination showed aortic coarctation. He died at age 6 months. Rivera et al. (1985) noted the similarities to the case reported by Fryns et al. (1977), who had a 16q21 deletion.; ; Naritomi et al. (1988) reported a girl with a de novo 16q13-q22 deletion. She had failure to thrive as a newborn and poor subsequent growth. She had a large anterior fontanel and widely patent cranial sutures at age 2 months. Brain CT showed mild hydrocephalus and an occipital meningoencephalocele. At age 18 months, the cranial sutures were still widely patent, and she had a high bossed forehead, epicanthal folds, hypertelorism, flat and broad nasal bridge, short nose, low-set, posteriorly rotated, deformed ears, high-arched palate, short neck, and widely spaced nipples. She was hypotonic and showed mild psychomotor retardation at age 3 years.; ; Fujiwara et al. (1992) reported a female infant with an interstitial deletion of chromosome 16q who had mild dysmorphic features, including prominent forehead, wide anterior fontanel, diastasis of the cranial sutures, hypertelorism, upslanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge, narrow thorax, and widely spaced nipples. She had severe failure to thrive due to recurrent vomiting and watery diarrhea, developed convulsions and repeated cardiac arrest, and died on day 159 of life from repeated infections. High resolution banding showed a de novo deletion of chromosome 16q22.1-q22.3. Fujiwara et al. (1992) reviewed previous reports of 7 additional patients with different deletions of regions 16q21 to 16q24, including 1 patient with a 16q13-q22 deletion, and noted that there was a constellation of similar features. Affected individuals had low birth weight, failure to thrive, feeding disturbances, hypotonia, and delayed psychomotor development. Dysmorphic features included prominent forehead, wide anterior fontanel, diastasis of cranial sutures, blepharostenosis, hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, low-set and deformed ears, and short neck. Less common features included narrow thorax and ectopic anus. The most common deleted region was 16q22.; ; Callen et al. (1993) reported the features of 4 unrelated patients with variable interstitial deletions of 16q21-q24. All the breakpoints were different. The phenotype was somewhat variable, but common features included failure to thrive, delayed psychomotor development, hypotonia, large anterior fontanel, high forehead, broad and flat nasal bridge, low-set dysmorphic ears, micrognathia, high-arched palate, flexed fingers, and broad first toe. Callen et al. (1993) also referred to a family in which 3 members had a deletion of 16q21 with a normal phenotype, suggesting that loss of 16q21 is not pathogenic.; ; Goto et al. (2004) reported a Japanese boy with an approximately 1.2-Mb deletion of chromosome 16q22 encompassing the CBFB gene (121360). At birth, he had low height, weight, and head circumference, but was noted to have a large and apparently bulging fontanel with delayed mineralization of the skull and no hydrocephalus. Radiographs showed open fontanel, multiple wormian bones along the sagittal suture, hypoplasia of the distal phalanges, and slightly narrow upper thorax. He later showed mild psychomotor retardation and dysmorphic features, including midface hypoplasia, upslanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, prominent earlobes, broad nasal tip, and pointed chin. Goto et al. (2004) noted that the phenotype was reminiscent of cleidocranial dysplasia (119600), caused by mutation in the RUNX2 gene (600211), and that CBFB forms a heterodimer with RUNX2. The findings suggested that 1 feature of the 16q22 deletion syndrome, large fontanels, may be due to haploinsufficiency of CBFB.; ; Khan et al. (2006) reported a boy with a de novo 16q21-q22 deletion. He had a cleft soft palate, delayed mineralization of the parietal bones, and mild dysmorphic features including hypertelorism, upslanting palpebral fissures, midface hypoplasia, and micrognathia. He had hypoplastic distal phalanges of the hands and a ventricular septal defect that resolved by age 6 months. There was no evidence of bone marrow insufficiency. Despite a difficult period in infancy mainly due to feeding difficulties, he later showed developmental gains by age 15 months. Haploinsufficiency of the CBFB gene was detected by FISH analysis, and no mutations were found in the RUNX2 gene. Khan et al. (2006) noted the phenotypic similarities to a Cbfb-deficient mouse model (Kundu et al., 2002) and suggested that CBFB haploinsufficiency in their patient may have led to the cranial ossification defects.
614557	Baumann et al. (2012) reported a 16-year-old Austrian boy who was born with severe muscle hypotonia, paucity of antigravity movements, poor sucking, hypermobile joints, and slightly bluish sclerae. At 2 months of age, the first signs of spinal deformity developed. Muscle weakness and hypotonia improved over subsequent months, with unsupported sitting at 13 months and unassisted walking at 2.5 years. He underwent surgical repair of an inguinal hernia at 2 years of age, placement of subdural-peritoneal shunt for chronic subdural hygroma at 3 years of age, and repair of a large bladder diverticulum at 9 years of age. Bilateral high frequency sensorineural hearing impairment requiring a hearing aid was diagnosed at 6 years of age. Progression of scoliosis resulted in a restrictive ventilation disorder, with a forced vital capacity of 34%. Echocardiography and thoracoabdominal CT scan at 13 years of age showed no signs of cardiomyopathy or dilation of the aorta or other large vessels. At age 16, he had severe kyphoscoliosis and marked hypermobility of the large and small joints (Beighton score, 6/9), but no contractures. He had a characteristic handshake 'like a bag of little bones' due to seeming collapse of the musculoskeletal structure of the hand on pressure. His skin was thin, soft, and hyperelastic, with follicular hyperkeratosis but no signs of increased fragility or atrophic scars; he had 2 keloids in the left deltoid area, where a skin biopsy had been taken. There was no skin wrinkling of the palms. He was myopic with normal corneal diameter. The proband's father had a female cousin who had severe muscle hypotonia and weakness at birth, scoliosis from age 2 years, and moderate bilateral high frequency sensorineural hearing impairment requiring hearing aids at 6 years of age. In her fifth decade, she developed progressive weakness of the lower limbs, and at 48 years of age, had difficulty climbing stairs and could not do toe or heel walking. Clinical examination showed a moderate degree of muscular atrophy in the legs and intrinsic hand muscles, without sensory deficit. She had marked instability of the knees and her Beighton score was 6/9. Her skin was soft and hyperelastic with easy bruisability, without abnormal scarring. She was myopic with normal corneal diameter. She had an older sister who was born with hypotonia, developed mild but progressive kyphoscoliosis and follicular hyperkeratosis, and died unexpectedly at 12 years of age from aortic rupture. Baumann et al. (2012) identified 4 additional patients from 4 unrelated families of Italian, French, Turkish, and German origin with similar presentations. Radiography showed mild to moderate osteopenia in all patients, but no increased bone fragility. Electromyopathy showed a myopathic pattern in adolescence and adulthood, but results obtained in infancy were mostly reported as normal. Histopathologic features of muscle biopsies ranged from nonspecific mild myopathic changes with increased variation in muscle fiber diameter to more pronounced changes with profound fiber atrophy and proliferation of fatty tissue. Electron microscopy of patient fibroblasts showed dilated cisterns filled with flocculent material, and immunofluorescence experiments demonstrated disturbed distribution and assembly of several extracellular matrix (ECM) components, including collagens type I and type III and fibronectin as well as their receptors. Baumann et al. (2012) noted that the disorder shared many features with the kyphoscoliotic form of EDS (225400) and Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090). ; ; Aldeeri et al. (2014) studied a 3-year-old boy in whom slow feeding and floppiness were evident shortly after birth. At 19 months of age, he had just taken his first steps and was observed to be borderline microcephalic with subtle dysmorphic features, including sloping forehead, square nasal root, mild hypotelorism, epicanthal folds, and hypotonia. He also had excessively redundant umbilical skin. At 2.5 years of age, he was making 2-word sentences and exhibited an immature waddling gait. He had appreciable skin laxity, with a Beighton score of 8/9. No specific mention was made of kyphoscoliosis or hearing loss, but at age 3 the child had an 'abnormal gait' and 'only 50% of his speech was understandable by strangers.' No hearing test was reported. Echocardiography revealed patent ductus arteriosus. Electromyography showed myopathic changes; muscle biopsy showed a predominance of type I fibers.; ; Dordoni et al. (2016) described an 8-year-old Italian boy with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and compound heterozygous mutations in the FKBP14 gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS) who had mixed hearing loss, mild nonprogressive kyphoscoliosis, and muscle hypotonia. In addition to these cardinal features of EDSKSCL2, at age 6 years he had left hypogastric artery pseudoaneurysm rupture. Thoracic and abdominal magnetic resonance angiography did not reveal any other arterial malformations. Also at age 6, flexion/extension x-rays of the cervical spine showed asymptomatic atlantoaxial instability, with enlarged atlantoaxial distance in flexion. The authors suggested that cerebrovascular monitoring is warranted in patients with FKBP14-associated EDS.; ; Giunta et al. (2018) reported a cohort of 17 individuals with kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and the follow-up of 3 previously reported patients, and provided an extensive overview of the disorder and its natural history. In a summary (Table 2) of features present in the 17 patients reported by Giunta et al. (2018) and 6 reported by Baumann et al. (2012), all reported patients had soft-textured skin, small-joint hypermobility, foot deformities, muscle hypotonia at birth, poor head control in infancy, improving weakness over time, and delayed motor development. More than two-thirds of these 23 patients presented with hyperextensible skin, hypermobile large joints, progressive kyphoscoliosis, and hearing impairment. Muscle atrophy was present in 63%, cardiac valve anomalies in 40%, vascular anomalies in 30%, visual refraction anomalies in 60%, and hernias in 47%. A variety of other features were associated with a minority of patients.; ; Castori et al. (2019) reported a 15-year-old girl with kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome who showed severe involvement of the lower limb muscles. Her parents were healthy and apparently unrelated, but were both born in a small city. She was born at 31 weeks' gestation and had congenital hypotonia, adducted thumbs and camptodactyly of the fingers, elbow contractures, and bilateral clubfeet. Her early motor milestones were significantly delayed, but she was intellectually normal. She was never able to walk without support, and a lower limb MRI showed a pattern of multiple muscle involvement. Her muscle weakness was nonprogressive. Other findings included bone mass density reduction of the spine, unilateral congenital hip dysplasia, and asymptomatic occipitoatlantoaxial instability. Audiologic examination at age 15 years showed bilateral mixed hearing loss. This case emphasized the wide spectrum associated with this condition.
614558	Veeramah et al. (2012) reported a 15-year-old girl with onset of refractory generalized seizures at age 6 months. At age 4 years, the seizure phenotype changed to epileptic spasms, followed by regression of speech and language skills. She also had developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and difficulties with coordination and balance. The language and communication problems, in combination with regression in social interaction and the development of obsessive-compulsive and repetitive behaviors, led to the classification of autism at age 5 years. Initial electroencephalogram (EEG) showed bifrontal spikes and brief bursts of generalized spike-wave activity. Later EEG showed diffuse slowing, multifocal spikes, and frontally predominant generalized spikes. Brain MRI was normal. The patient died suddenly at age 15 years. There was no family history of a similar disorder.; ; Ohba et al. (2014) reported 7 unrelated children with DEE13 ranging between 1 and 13 years of age. Five patients were Japanese and 2 were Israeli. Two patients had onset of intractable seizures in the first days of life, and 5 had onset between 3 and 7 months of age. Seizure type was variable and included tonic-clonic, absence, and atonic. All patients had developed delayed psychomotor development with severe to profound intellectual disability; 3 were bedridden at the time of the report. Brain imaging showed mild cerebral atrophy in all but 1 patient. Initial EEG was normal in 4 patients, but most eventually showed some abnormalities. Over time, 1 patient became seizure-free with medication and 3 were controlled with medication.; ; De Kovel et al. (2014) reported a 3-year-old girl with DEE13 who had onset of intractable seizures at age 6 months. She had slightly delayed development in early infancy, but showed development regression, progressive microcephaly, and severe psychomotor retardation after seizure onset. EEG showed hypsarrhythmia, and seizures continued despite multiple medications. Brain imaging was initially normal but showed diffuse brain atrophy, mild cerebellar atrophy, and interrupted myelination at age 9 months. At age 3 years, she was unable to sit without support and had no speech.
614559	Spiegel et al. (2012) reported 8 patients from 2 Arab Muslim families with a severe infantile-onset neurodegenerative disorder and mutation in the ACO2 gene. The patients presented at age 2 to 6 months with truncal hypotonia, head bobbing, athetosis, generalized seizures, and ophthalmologic abnormalities that included strabismus, nystagmus, abnormal eye movements, and abnormal pursuit. The disease course was characterized by failure to thrive, muscle atrophy, and hypo-/areflexia. All failed to attain significant developmental milestones, culminating in profound psychomotor retardation. Only some achieved rolling, sitting, and recognition of family. There was progressive degeneration of vision, with retinal dystrophy and optic atrophy. Two patients had progressive hearing loss. EEG showed generalized or focal spike and wave activity and slow background compatible with a nonspecific encephalopathy. One patient had evidence of a peripheral demyelinating neuropathy. Brain MRI tended to be normal in the first months of life, but thereafter showed progressive cerebellar atrophy, cortical atrophy, and thinning of the corpus callosum. Extensive laboratory studies were normal, including mitochondrial respiratory enzyme activities on skeletal muscle, but there was a mild decrease in glutamate oxidation (about 63% of normal). The oldest living patient was 18 years old and in a vegetative state.; ; Metodiev et al. (2014) reported 2 infant brothers, born of consanguineous Algerian parents, with ICRD and mutation in the ACO2 gene. Both presented at birth with episodes of central apnea and bradycardia; 1 also showed hypotonia, abnormal twisting of the arms, and abnormal eye movements. Both patients died in early infancy. One of the patients had edema of the optic discs without retinal anomalies, whereas the other had pallor of the optic discs with extinguished visual-evoked potentials and electroretinograms. Brain imaging of both patients showed moderate cerebellar atrophy. Laboratory investigations showed metabolic acidosis and hyperglycemia with normal serum lactate in 1 patient, but no metabolic abnormalities in the other. An unrelated 10-year-old girl had less severe manifestations of the disorder. She had severely delayed psychomotor development with profoundly impaired intellectual development (ID) and was wheelchair-bound. In infancy, she had nystagmus, poor eye contact, and progressive microcephaly. Fundus examination showed pallor of the optic discs with altered visual-evoked potentials. Brain MRI showed moderate cerebellar atrophy. Analysis of mitochondrial respiratory chain activities in skeletal muscle and fibroblasts was normal.; ; Sadat et al. (2016) studied a 3-year-old boy of Afro-Caribbean and East Indian ancestry who had neuromuscular symptoms and mutation in the ACO2 gene. He first presented at 6 months of age with truncal ataxia, which progressed to more distal hypotonia, ultimately resulting in ataxia requiring support for ambulation. At age 18 months, he exhibited global developmental delay together with dysmorphic facial features that included downslanting palpebral fissures, prominent forehead, and droopy eyelids. He was noted to have occasional myoclonic jerks during times of illness. Other clinical features included moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss bilaterally and cog-wheel eye saccades. Optic nerves appeared normal. Neurologic examination revealed prominent cerebellar involvement with oculomotor dyspraxia, truncal unsteadiness and disequilibrium, gait ataxia, mild limb dysmetria, and reduced muscle tone. MRI studies of the brain and spine were unremarkable.; ; Srivastava et al. (2017) reported a patient with ICRD and mutation in the ACO2 gene. The proband initially presented at 15 months of age with truncal ataxia in the setting of a viral illness. After further episodes of illness-associated ataxia, the ataxia became permanent. He had delayed motor and speech development, and never achieved independent walking. At age 2 years he began to have seizures, which evolved into intractable generalized epilepsy. He experienced vision decline with progressive pigmentary retinopathy. Electroretinography at age 4 years revealed attenuated responses, optic atrophy, and pigmentary retinopathy. Neuropsychologic assessment at age 17 suggested severe to profound intellectual disability. On examination at age 18, he had short stature, bifid uvula, submucous cleft palate, and pes planovalgus. He had dysarthria, axial hypotonia, appendicular hypertonia, and ataxia of his trunk and limbs. He used a wheelchair for mobility. Brain MRI revealed mild cerebellar atrophy.; ; Bouwkamp et al. (2018) reported a brother and sister, aged 28 and 14 years, respectively, with spastic paraplegia, impaired ID, and microcephaly, and mutation in the ACO2 gene. The brother had low birth weight and head circumference as well as failure to thrive in infancy. At 3 months of age, he developed seizures, which spontaneously remitted at age 5 years. In childhood, he developed progressive spasticity of his lower limbs and was unable to walk independently. He had severely impaired ID and lack of speech. Brain MRI at age 19 years showed mild atrophy of the cerebellum. At age 28, he had a spastic gait with lower limb weakness and a foot drop, but was able to walk with assistance. Hearing and vision were normal, including funduscopic examination and auditory event-related potentials. His sister presented with developmental delay at age 1 year. At age 3 years, she spoke her first words and started to walk, although she had toe-walking and a limp. During childhood, she had episodic attacks of ataxia, tremor, altered consciousness, and behavioral changes associated with febrile episodes, which were followed by regression in psychomotor function. At age 15 years, she had moderately impaired ID, with basic reading, writing, and mathematic skills. Hearing and visual function were normal, including funduscopic examination and auditory event-related potentials. She had bilateral syndactyly of the second and third phalanges of the feet, and both feet were in an equinovarus position. Her head circumference was at the 3rd percentile. She had lower limb weakness, spastic gait, and toe-walking. Repeated brain MRIs showed a nonspecific isolated subcortical white matter signal abnormality in the left frontal lobe.; ; Marelli et al. (2018) reported 2 sisters with severe optic atrophy and spastic paraplegia and mutation in the OCA2 gene. The 56-year-old proband had slowly progressive symptoms from infancy, with delayed motor and mental development. She presented at age 38 years with visual problems, and at 49 years due to exacerbation of the spastic paraplegia. Brain MRI showed mild vermian cerebellar atrophy, and neurologic examination revealed mild upper limb ataxia, diffuse hyperreflexia, and severe spastic paraplegia with bilateral extensor plantar reflex. There were no signs of peripheral neuropathy, and electromyography was normal. Ophthalmologic examination confirmed severely reduced visual acuity and bilateral optic atrophy without retinal involvement, which was stable since first examination at age 38. The proband had a more severely affected sister, with visual problems, spasticity, and cognitive impairment.; ; Sharkia et al. (2019) reported clinical features in an international cohort of 16 patients with ICRD and biallelic ACO2 mutations, 8 of whom had previously been reported by Spiegel et al. (2012). Most of the patients presented within the first year of life with hypotonia, truncal ataxia, strabismus, seizures, and progressive microcephaly. Optic atrophy was seen in most patients by the age of 5 years and developed gradually. Optic atrophy was followed by progressive retinal degeneration and abnormal retinal pigmentation. Most patients had severe to profound developmental delay evident within the first 2 years of life. Truncal ataxia and dystonic hand movements were prominent in the first 3 years. Most patients did not acquire any language skills or independent walking. Most of the patients were able to orally feed, and only 2 patients required insertion of a gastric tube. Five patients older than 10 years developed severe kyphoscoliosis. Seizures occurred in most patients, and typically started within the first 2 years. Four patients had sensorineural hearing loss. Two patients died prematurely at age 3 years (E1) and 14 years (A2), both due to neurologic complications. A subgroup of 3 patients (A1, E2, and E3) with compound heterozygous mutations in ACO2 had a relatively milder phenotype with later onset of symptoms and more preserved neurologic function. They had variable walking abilities, limited language, and comparatively better development and growth.; ; Blackburn et al. (2020) described the clinical characteristics of 5 patients with biallelic mutations in ACO2. Patients 1 and 2 were brothers, aged 12 and 15 years, who had relatively mild symptoms, including episodic ataxia, mild developmental delays, dysarthria, and behavioral problems. Brain MRI in patient 2 at age 6 years showed small midbrain, pons, and middle cerebellar peduncles. Patient 3 had cerebellar hypoplasia, ataxia, seizures, optic atrophy, and retinitis pigmentosa. At age 26 years, she had moderately to severely impaired ID, a vocabulary of 4 to 5 words, and was nonambulatory. Patient 4 had severe neonatal hypotonia, diminished reflexes, and central apnea resulting in ventilator dependence. Ophthalmologic examination showed bilateral retinal degeneration and optic atrophy. Brain MRI at age 5 months showed dilatation of the ventricles, prominent subarachnoid spaces, thinning of the corpus callosum, hypoplastic cerebellar vermis, and a hypoplastic pons. He developed multifocal epilepsy and died at 9 months of age. Patient 5 presented with ataxia and developed severe progressive spastic quadriplegia. Brain MRI at age 4 years showed global hypomyelination. At age 11 she had severe hypotonia, absent visually evoked potentials, and severe developmental and motor delays.
614561	Labrune et al. (1996) reported 3 unrelated children with progressive calcifications in the cerebrum and cerebellum and leukodystrophy on MRI. The changes were noted between early infancy and adolescence. Clinical features included slowing of cognition, seizures, and a movement disorder with pyramidal, extrapyramidal, and cerebellar features. Two patients became wheelchair-bound. All developed parenchymal cysts in the cerebellum or supratentorial regions. Brain biopsy of 1 patient showed angiomatous changes consisting of numerous small tortuous blood vessels with calcifications, irregular Rosenthal fibers, and hyaline deposits. Retinal abnormalities were not reported. Labrune et al. (1996) postulated a diffuse cerebral microangiopathy resulting in microcystic and macrocystic parenchymal degeneration.; ; Jenkinson et al. (2016) reported 40 patients from 33 unrelated families, mostly of European origin, with LCC. The patients had been collected over a period of 12 years. The age at presentation ranged between infancy and 54 years, although the vast majority of patients presented with neurologic features in the first months or years of life. Features were highly variable and included developmental delay, progressive motor disturbances, impaired gait, seizures, spasticity, dystonia, ataxia, dysarthria, and hemiparesis. Some individuals were severely impaired with mental retardation, loss of speech, and inability to walk, whereas a few patients had onset of mild motor symptoms in adulthood. Brain imaging characteristically showed white matter abnormalities in the periventricular, deep, and subcortical white matter, cysts in the deep matter, and calcifications. Brain biopsy of 1 adult patient showed numerous abnormal blood vessels resembling angioma, evidence of old hemorrhage, vascular and parenchymal calcification, and extensive gliosis with Rosenthal fibers.
614563	Vissers et al. (2010) reported a 4-year-old boy with global developmental delay. He showed hypotonia at age 6 months, followed by delayed psychomotor development. Mild dysmorphic features included prominent forehead, plagiocephaly, hypotonic face with downslanting palpebral fissures, and short, broad hands and feet. Brain MRI was reported as normal. His parents were unaffected. Follow-up of the patient at age 6 years by Willemsen et al. (2012) noted that he had hypotonia, hyporeflexia, and broad-based waddling gait with toe walking. Reevaluation of brain MRI showed signs of bilateral cortical malformation with deficient gyration of the frontal lobes and an area suggestive of focal cortical dysplasia. Willemsen et al. (2012) also reported a 51-year-old woman with severe mental retardation and an inability to walk or speak. She had short stature, microcephaly, clubfeet, and small hands and feet with short toes. Craniofacial features included brachycephaly, prominent forehead, hypertelorism, deep-set eyes, wide mouth with everted lower lip, and downturned corners of the mouth. She developed generalized seizures at age 3 years. Other features included kyphoscoliosis, spastic tetraplegia, and swallowing difficulties. Cerebral CT scan at the age 46 years showed enlarged ventricles and clear signs of cortical malformation with wide opercular regions and an abnormal flat cortex with only a few simple and shallow sulci; MRI scan was not possible.; ; Poirier et al. (2013) reported 8 unrelated patients with moderate to severely impaired intellectual development associated with cortical brain malformations on MRI. All but 1 had seizures, most of early onset. Three had microcephaly, 3 were bedridden with spastic tetraplegia, 2 were described as having 'awkwardness' on neurologic examination, and 3 patients had foot deformities consistent with axonal neuropathy. Brain MRI showed predominantly posterior pachygyria, and some patients also had frontal polymicrogyria or nodular heterotopia. Several patients also had other brain abnormalities, including dysmorphic basal ganglia and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, brainstem, and/or cerebellum.
614564	Tanaka et al. (2012) reported a family in which 24 individuals over 4 generations had telangiectases that appeared during infancy (before 18 months of age) in both sun-exposed and sun-protected skin. Other clinical features included thinning of the lateral eyebrows and patchy alopecia in areas of skin with prominent telangiectases. Thin dental enamel and dental caries in both primary and secondary dentition were also noted, and some patients had mild dystrophic nail changes as well, including longitudinal ridging, thin nails prone to cracking, onycholysis, and onychomycosis. In addition, 10 of the 24 patients developed oropharyngeal cancer, typically in the third decade of life or later. Other reported malignancies included nonmelanoma skin cancer (basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and sebaceous carcinoma) in 3 individuals, breast cancer in 1, and cervical cancer in 1.
614565	Peachey et al. (2012) studied 2 probands with complete congenital stationary night blindness (cCSNB). The first proband, who had no family history of night blindness or consanguinity, was 10 years old at the time of diagnosis. He presented with 20/70 best-corrected visual acuities, mild myopic refractive error, congenital nystagmus, a history of early-onset night blindness, normal retinal appearance, and full Goldmann visual fields. Dark-adapted ERGs showed a markedly reduced b-wave, whereas the ERG obtained to a high flash luminance had a robust a-wave without the subsequent b-wave seen in controls. Under light-adapted conditions, the ERG waveform showed a square a-wave but retained a late positive ERG component. The second proband was a woman of Norwegian descent who was 20 years old at the time of diagnosis. She presented with rotatory nystagmus, a very unusual blond fundus, congenital night blindness, and decreased visual acuity. ERGs in the second proband were similar to those of the first proband, with selective absence of the dark-adapted b-wave and a square light-adapted a-wave. Peachey et al. (2012) noted that these ERG abnormalities had been shown to be characteristic of selective dysfunction of the ON-bipolar pathway with OFF-bipolar pathway preservation by Miyake et al. (1994), thus distinguishing cCSNB from other retinal disorders with a reduced b-wave.
614575	Migliaccio et al. (2004) reported 4 unrelated patients, 2 males and 2 females, with a syndrome comprising cerebellar ataxia and bilateral vestibulopathy with impaired ability of the eye velocity to match head velocity. All had a characteristic sign on clinical examination: impairment of the visually enhanced vestibuloocular reflex (VVOR), or 'doll's head reflex,' in which a normal individual shows compensatory saccades when the head is slowly and smoothly oscillated from side to side while trying to view an earth-fixed target straight ahead. None of the patients had a family history of a similar disorder. Each patient presented between 50 and 60 years of age with slowly increasing gait ataxia and later developed dysarthria. All had problems standing and showed a positive Romberg test. Limb ataxia was less prominent. Detailed vestibuloocular testing showed impaired smooth pursuit, impaired vestibuloocular reflex, and impaired optokinetic reflex. Gaze-evoked nystagmus was present under certain conditions. Three patients had clinical and electrophysiologic evidence of a sensory peripheral neuropathy. Sural nerve biopsy of 1 patient showed a severe axonal neuropathy. None had extrapyramidal features. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy. Genetic testing for several common spinocerebellar ataxias (see, e.g., SCA1, 164400) was negative.; ; Szmulewicz et al. (2011) reported retrospective data on 27 patients, including the 4 reported by Migliaccio et al. (2004), with a syndrome including cerebellar ataxia, neuropathy, and vestibular areflexia, which they termed 'CANVAS.' The median age at onset was 60 years (range, 33-71), and most (20 patients) presented with gait imbalance. Other presenting features included dysesthesia (8), oscillopsia (5), dizziness (2), and intrinsic falls (1). All patients had saccadic smooth pursuit, gaze-evoked nystagmus, gait and limb ataxia, and dysarthria. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy in 22 patients. Detailed vestibular function testing showed that all had bilateral vestibulopathy manifest as decreased visual acuity on vertical head shaking, absent or reduced horizontal nystagmus on caloric stimulation, and absent or reduced nystagmus in response to constant acceleration rotational testing. VVOR deficit was demonstrated by videooculography. Hearing was unaffected. Temporal bone and brain pathology of 1 patient showed atrophy of the vestibular nerves and vestibular, trigeminal, and facial ganglion cells, but not of the cochlear ganglion cells. There was also a loss of cerebellar Purkinje cells. There was a non-length-dependent neuropathy with areflexia and decreased vibration and pinprick sensation in the upper and lower limbs associated with absence of sensory nerve action potentials.; ; Cortese et al. (2019) reported 23 affected individuals, either sib pairs or first cousins, from 11 unrelated families with CANVAS. They subsequently identified 33 additional patients with sporadic occurrence of the disorder. All patients were of European descent. The mean age at onset was 54 (range, 35-73 years), and most patients presented with unsteadiness or dizziness, particularly in the dark, and/or distal numbness. Patients had peripheral neuropathy and cerebellar dysfunction, usually associated with cerebellar atrophy on brain imaging, and most also had vestibular dysfunction. Nerve conduction studies showed a nonlength-dependent sensory neuropathy with no motor abnormalities, and sural nerve biopsies showed loss of myelinated fibers. Less common features included cough and autonomic abnormalities, such as urinary urgency, erectile dysfunction, and blood pressure dysregulation. Neuropathologic examination of 1 patient showed severe widespread loss of Purkinje cells and gliosis in the cerebellum. There were no pathologic cytoplasmic or intranuclear inclusions or abnormal RNAi foci in the cerebellar cortex.; ; Beecroft et al. (2020) reported 13 Maori patients with CANVAS, 2 from Cook Island and 11 from New Zealand. The mean age of symptom onset, excluding patient M2 V:1, was 55 years. Ten of 13 patients had dysarthria, 7 of 13 had sensory symptoms, and 3 of 9 had vestibular symptoms. Eight of 10 patients had a cough, 8 of 12 had autonomic dysfunction, 12 of 12 had an ataxic gait, 7 of 12 had nystagmus, 7 of 12 had reduced reflexes, and 9 of 11 had limb ataxia. Brain MRI or CT findings showed vermal atrophy in 9 of 10 patients, and a video head impulse test (vHIT) was abnormal in 9 of 10 patients. Two of 5 patients had an REM sleep behavior disorder. Patient M2 V:1, aged 20 years, had symptom onset at age 6 years, was wheelchair-dependent at age 8, and had profound limb ataxia at age 20. Brain MRI at age 6 years showed increased signal in the cerebellar peduncles and dorsal brainstem. It was thought that she had an early onset form of the disorder.; ; Scriba et al. (2020) reported 3 patients from 2 unrelated families from the Asian Pacific region with CANVAS associated with a ACAGG(n) repeat expansion in the RFC1 gene (102579.0007). Two brothers (family Indo1) presented in their mid-50's with distal weakness and atrophy of the lower limbs with later involvement of the upper limbs, poor balance, chronic cough, abnormal vestibuloocular reflex, severe sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy, and decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes. Cerebellar signs included saccadic pursuit, gait ataxia, and dysarthria associated with progressive cerebellar atrophy on brain imaging. They also had fasciculations and increased serum creatine kinase; muscle biopsy showed atrophic muscle fibers and group atrophy, consistent with a neurogenic cause. Electron microscopy showed subsarcolemmal accumulation of pleomorphic mitochondria with electron-dense inclusions. An unrelated female patient (N1) presented at age 57 with syncope, dysarthria, dysphagia, nystagmus, broken smooth pursuit, abnormal vestibular ocular reflex, sensory neuropathy, ataxia, and cerebellar atrophy. Additional features included autonomic dysfunction, muscle cramps, fasciculations, absent reflexes, and mild intention tremor. Serum creatine kinase was elevated, and EMG showed chronic denervation. The disorder was progressive and she died at age 71.; ; Weber et al. (2023) reported 2 unrelated patients with CANVAS. Case 1, a 62-year-old man, presented with progressive ataxia, cerebellar signs, and hand myotonia. He developed gait problems at 37 years of age and had a chronic cough since age 20 years. On examination, he had proprioceptive ataxia, absent deep tendon reflexes, and sensory abnormalities. Other findings included action tremor, dysarthria, and vertical nystagmus. He had symptoms of dysautonomia, including orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia, and abnormal temperature regulation. Brain MRI showed mild cerebellar atrophy involving the vermis. Case 2, a 38-year-old man, presented with cerebellar and proprioceptive ataxia, which started at age 32 with gait abnormalities. On examination, he had decreased vibration sense at the ankles, cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria, and brisk deep tendon reflexes and fasciculations of the lower limbs. He had a chronic cough since age 18 years. EMG showed generalized sensory neuronopathy. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy of the vermis and cerebellar hemispheres.; ; Miyatake et al. (2022) reported 16 Japanese adults from 11 unrelated families with onset of CANVAS in late adulthood (mean age of disease onset was 62 years). Patients 1-6 came from the same consanguineous family (family A), whereas patients 7-16 came from unrelated families and were identified through a cohort of 210 patients with unsolved ataxia who underwent genetic screening. Four patients died in their mid-70's. The patients had typical features of the disorder, including unsteady or ataxic gait disturbances, sometimes resulting in loss of ambulation, cerebellar impairment, usually with cerebellar atrophy on brain imaging, nystagmus, peripheral sensory neuropathy, and decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes. More variable features included dysarthria, vestibular impairment, autonomic involvement, sensorineural hearing loss, saccadic eye movements, pyramidal signs (hyperreflexia or extensor plantar responses), chronic cough, and mild cognitive impairment. Three patients had evidence of lower motor neuron involvement, including muscle atrophy, fasciculations, slightly increased serum creatine kinase, and chronic neurogenic atrophy on EMG.
614576	Lubbehusen et al. (2010) reported a female infant, born of nonconsanguineous Turkish parents, with a severe neurologic disorder resulting in death at 5 weeks of age. At birth, she showed intractable focal seizures, vomiting, and loss of consciousness due to intracranial bleeding resulting in part from a vitamin K deficiency. Laboratory studies showed mildly increased lactate, aspartate aminotransferase, and creatine kinase. Family history revealed 2 other children who died in the perinatal period with signs of an increased bleeding tendency.; ; Huybrechts et al. (2012) reported a 27-month-old girl, born of consanguineous Moroccan parents, with CDG2L. At birth, she was noted to have dysmorphic features, including microcephaly, postaxial polydactyly, broad palpebral fissures, retrognathia, and anal anteposition. During the first months of life, she had recurrent infections, diarrhea, and failure to thrive, and was found to have a primary combined immunodeficiency with hypogammaglobulinemia and defective cellular immunity without lymphopenia. Granulocyte function was also abnormal. She later developed multisystem abnormalities, including hepatomegaly, abnormal liver enzymes, micronodular cirrhosis, macrovesicular steatosis, axial hypotonia, mild neurodevelopmental delay, proximal tubulopathy, and inflammatory bowel disease. Serum transferrin isoelectric focusing was abnormal, showing a type II pattern. Rymen et al. (2015) reported follow-up of this patient. She continued to have recurrent infections, chronic gastrointestinal inflammation and malabsorption, failure to thrive, hepatomegaly with elevated liver enzymes, and renal tubulopathy, all of which contributed to death at age 6 years.; ; Rymen et al. (2015) reported 7 additional patients with CDG2L, including the sister and 2 sib cousins of the patient reported by Lubbehusen et al. (2010). The sib cousins (P4.1 and P4.2) were said to be born of parents from Morocco; 3 patients were Turkish and 1 was from Bulgaria. Some of the pregnancies showed decreased fetal movements and were complicated by oligo- or polyhydramnios. The patients presented in the first months of life with neonatal hypotonia, failure to thrive, severely delayed psychomotor development, and nonspecific dysmorphic features. Other common features included liver involvement with hepatosplenomegaly, cholestasis, elevated liver enzymes, hyperbilirubinemia, and fibrosis or cirrhosis, as well as chronic diarrhea, enteropathy, microcephaly, cardiac septal defects, recurrent infections, hypohidrosis, and hyperkeratosis. One patient had arthrogryposis, clubfeet, and hip dysplasia, and another had postaxial polydactyly. Brain imaging was abnormal in some patients, showing hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, cortical atrophy, enlarged ventricles, and cerebellar atrophy. One patient had abnormal gyration. Several patients had thrombocytopenia, anemia, pancytopenia, and/or coagulation defects with bleeding episodes. Two patients had intractable seizures. Five of the 7 patients died in the first days or weeks of life. Two patients were still alive at ages 21 and 12 years. The 12-year-old girl learned to sit without support, but was never able to walk. She developed stereotypic movements of the hands and self-aggressive behavior and had recurrent infections. A sister was born with similar clinical features; she died at age 15 months. All patients studied showed a type 2 CDG pattern on serum transferrin analysis.
614582	Galmiche et al. (2011) reported a nonconsanguineous French family in which 4 sibs had a severe mitochondrial disorder. After normal growth and development in the first few months of life, the patients presented at about 6 months of age with failure to thrive and poor feeding. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was diagnosed at 9 to 11 months of age, and resulted in death in 2 patients at ages 17 and 15 months, respectively. Other features included hepatomegaly and psychomotor retardation. Laboratory studies showed increased plasma lactate and alanine, as well as abnormal liver enzymes. Detailed studies on patient fibroblasts and muscle samples showed a combined decrease in activity of mitochondrial respiratory complexes I, III, IV, and V, with a mild decrease in complex II. BN-PAGE analysis showed a decrease in fully assembled complexes I, IV, and V, whereas complex II was normal.; ; Bursle et al. (2017) reported a male infant, born of unrelated parents, with a severe mitochondrial disorder resulting in death at 11 months of age. He presented soon after birth with lethargy, poor feeding, hypoglycemia, and metabolic acidosis with increased lactate. Liver enzymes, pyruvate, and creatine kinase were mildly elevated, suggesting mitochondrial dysfunction. He also had profound sensorineural hearing loss with a sloping audiogram and lactate peak in the basal ganglia. He developed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy around 8 months of age, and at age 11 months, he died of cardiorespiratory failure associated with an infection. Postmortem examination of the liver showed mild periportal steatosis and minimal fibrosis; renal tubules showed an evolving interstitial nephritis. Analysis of respiratory chain enzymes in patient tissue was not performed. Bursle et al. (2017) concluded that the natural history of COXPD9 is a severe multisystemic disorder.
614583	Riviere et al. (2012) reported 8 patients with Baraitser-Winter syndrome-2. Three of 7 of those examined had short stature; 4 of 7 had postnatal microcephaly; all 5 patients evaluated had intellectual disability; 5 of 6 had hearing loss; and 7 of 8 had seizures. Seven of 7 had trigonocephaly; 7 of 8 had hypertelorism; 7 of 7 had high-arched eyebrows; and 8 of 8 had ptosis. Five of 7 had iris or retinal coloboma and 7 of 7 patients evaluated had anterior-to-posterior gradient lissencephaly of the pachygyria or pachygyria-band type.; ; Verloes et al. (2015) described the phenotype and neuroimaging of 42 patients with a clinical diagnosis of Baraitser-Winter syndrome, Fryns-Aftimos syndrome, or cerebrofrontofacial syndrome, and suggested that the disorder be unified under a single designation. The major clinical anomalies were striking dysmorphic facial features with hypertelorism, broad nose with large tip and prominent root, congenital nonmyopathic ptosis, ridged metopic sutures, and arched eyebrows. Iris or retinal coloboma was present in many cases, as was sensorineural deafness. Cleft lip and palate, hallux duplex, congenital heart defects, and renal tract anomalies were seen in some patients. Microcephaly developed in some patients. Nearly all patients with ACTG1 mutations and around 60% of those with ACTB mutations had some degree of pachygyria with anteroposterior severity gradient, and rarely lissencephaly or neuronal heterotopia. Reduction of shoulder girdle muscle bulk and progressive joint stiffness were common. Early muscular involvement, occasionally with congenital arthrogryposis, was present. Intellectual disability and epilepsy were variable in severity and largely correlated with central nervous system anomalies.
614592	Merrill et al. (2012) reported 4 fetuses, 3 female and 1 male, with bent bone dysplasia syndrome and mutation in the FGFR2 gene. Examination revealed dysmorphic facial features including low-set ears, hypertelorism, midface hypoplasia, prematurely erupted fetal teeth, and micrognathia. The 3 female fetuses all displayed clitoromegaly, and 1 had hepatosplenomegaly with extramedullary hematopoiesis that was noted at autopsy. Radiographic findings included bent long bones, particularly involving the femora; osteopenia; irregular periosteal surfaces, especially in the phalanges; deficient skull ossification; coronal craniosynostosis; and hypoplastic clavicles and pubis. Histologic analysis of the distal femoral growth plate from 2 fetuses showed that the growth plate contained smaller hypertrophic chondrocytes compared to a control, and there was a thickened, hypercellular periosteum.
614594	Olmsted (1927) reported an Italian American boy who had onset of disease at age 18 months and, at 5 years, had symmetric massive yellow-gray horny plaques on his palms, divided into a mosaic pattern by several deep fissures. The lesions ended abruptly at the wrists and sides of the hands in a narrow red marginal zone. The plaques on the palmar surfaces of the fingers and thumbs were divided by transverse fissures at the interphalangeal joints, and there was flexion deformity of all digits that severely limited movement of the fingers. The nonhyperkeratotic skin of the dorsum of the fingers was purple-pink and almost cyanotic in appearance, and was frequently studded with tiny droplets of perspiration. There was pronounced subungual and circumungual hyperkeratosis, and the fingernails curved laterally and anteroposteriorly, forming a cap to each digit. The nail substance was thickened and lusterless, with transverse ridges. The plantar lesions resembled those of the palms, except for being somewhat less marked in degree, and there were similar nail changes. Hyperhidrosis of the hands and feet was variable. The facial lesions consisted of a row of yellow-brown plaques of epidermis, interrupted by fissures, situated parallel to the mucocutaneous junction of the lower lip and angles of the mouth. The anal fissure was filled completely by opposing plaques of rough red-brown epidermis, with a cone-shaped crater in the center; proctoscopic examination revealed no abnormalities of the anal canal or rectum. A biopsy of the anal lesion showed simple hyperkeratosis. The remainder of the skin appeared normal, and hair and teeth appeared uninvolved. Over 9 months of follow-up, the only successful treatment was prolonged soaking of involved parts in warm water followed by mechanical removal of the thickened epidermis; the lesions recurred within a few weeks of cessation of treatment. During the third month of observation, some of the transverse fissures at the interphalangeal joints became deeper, ultimately resulting in spontaneous amputation of 2 of the terminal phalanges. There was no family history of cutaneous disorders. Olmsted (1927) stated that associated hyperkeratotic lesions of the circumoral and circumanal regions had not previously been reported in congenital palmoplantar keratoderma.; ; Keir (1967) described an 11-year-old Jordanian girl who at 4 years of age developed plantar erythema, followed by scaling and the development of gross hyperkeratosis; at 7 years of age, her palms became similarly affected. Eventually the left and later the right fifth toes underwent spontaneous amputation. Examination at 11 years of age revealed severe, symmetric, sharply delineated palmar and plantar hyperkeratosis, contracting the hands and feet to such a degree as to render them useless. She had excessive sweating, most marked over the limbs, where it also seemed to penetrate the sodden horny material on the palms and soles. Fingernails and toenails were dystrophic, and there was mild ichthyosis of the scalp, arms, and trunk. Radiographs showed some resorption of all the terminal phalanges, with absence of the left fifth toe and almost total resorption of the right fifth toe. Histologic examination of the palmoplantar lesions showed a very thick horny layer with parakeratosis extending to the surface and considerable acanthosis; the granular layer was absent.; ; Atherton et al. (1990) described a 4-year-old boy, son of the Jordanian patient reported by Keir (1967), who developed keratoderma of his soles at 16 months of age, with appearance of palmar lesions at 23 months. All of his nails were thickened and transversally ridged. In addition to the palmoplantar lesions, the boy had a brownish-yellow crusted plaque about 2 cm wide, running below the entire length of the lower lip and including the angles of the mouth, but sparing the vermilion. The plaque had an erythematous border and closely resembled the palmoplantar skin changes. A similar lesion ran just below the nose, but there was no perianal involvement. The mother, who was now 32 years of age, had less severe PPK but had undergone the loss of 6 toes and had significant disability.; ; Poulin et al. (1984) described what they stated was the third case of Olmsted syndrome, citing Olmsted (1927) and Costa (1962). The patient was originally studied by Wells and Winkelmann (1961) and thought to represent a case of acrodermatitis enteropathica (201100) due to prominent periorificial dermatitis and alopecia, but the lesions did not respond to oral zinc therapy and the patient had a normal serum level of zinc. The 23-year-old male patient had severe diffuse, progressive, and transgrediens palmoplantar keratoderma with starfish-like extensions over the flexor surfaces of the wrists, periorificial keratoderma, linear keratoses on the flexor surfaces of the extremities and at sites of friction such as the axillae and the waist, keratosis pilaris (604093)-like lesions on the lateral aspect of the arms, leukokeratosis of the tongue, abnormalities of cutaneous adnexae with congenital alopecia universalis, onychodystrophy, and anhidrosis of the palms and soles with normal sweating elsewhere. The patient was also noted to have a missing premolar tooth; several other family members were reported to have multiple missing secondary teeth. His uninvolved skin was somewhat hyperelastic, and the large joints of the arms and legs showed striking laxity; a deceased uncle who had similar loose skin and joints was considered to have had Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type III (130020). Radiographs of the hands and feet showed generalized osteoporosis with pronounced atresia of the distal phalanges of all fingers and toes. Biopsy of the tongue lesion showed a dense infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes, and plasma cells in the submucosa, with epithelial hyperplasia and parakeratosis, but no atypia of the epidermal cells.; ; Rivers et al. (1985) reported 4 affected individuals, spanning 3 generations of a family segregating mutilating PPK. The most severely affected was a 12-year-old boy, whose father, paternal aunt, and paternal grandmother were also affected. All had involvement of the palms and soles with contractures of the digits; the paternal aunt also had persistent fissuring at the stomal angles of her mouth and the boy had a reddened, dry area of the gluteal cleft. Histologic findings of the palmoplantar lesions were similar in all patients, showing marked hyperkeratosis, with a poor granular layer in areas of focal parakeratosis; the epidermis showed only mild acanthosis, and the dermis showed a sparse, primarily perivascular, lymphatic infiltrate. All of the patients responded to etretinate, with disappearance of the lesions of the palms and soles, and resolution of pseudoainhums after only 8 weeks of therapy; however, the perioral and sacral hyperkeratoses remained unchanged. All patients experienced a recurrence of palmoplantar discomfort within 2 weeks of withdrawal of etretinate, and therefore all were started on maintenance therapy.; ; Mevorah et al. (2005) reported a 2-year-old Arab girl from Gaza with mutilating PPK as well as periorificial hyperkeratosis involving the mouth, ear meatus, nostrils, and anus. The nails were dystrophic with subungual hyperkeratosis, and hair was sparse anteriorly. Teeth were normal, but there was leukokeratosis of the tongue and buccal mucosa. Ophthalmologic examination revealed a punctate corneal opacity of the left eye. Radiographs of hands and wrists were normal, including bone age, as was audiometric examination. Histopathology of palmar skin showed psoriasiform hyperplasia, hypogranulosis, and alternating parakeratosis, and orthohyperkeratosis. Electron microscopy demonstrated, in the malpighian layer, keratinocytes with well-developed desmosomes, increased intercellular spaces, finely distributed tonofilaments, and numerous glycogen granules, as well as a reduced number of keratohyaline granules. Of 100 scalp hairs examined from the sparse area, 14 showed pili torti or trichorrhexis nodosa-type defects, whereas no such defects were seen in 100 hairs from a normal area.; ; Lin et al. (2012) studied 5 sporadic Chinese patients with Olmsted syndrome, and 1 patient whose affected daughter died at 2 years of age. All affected individuals developed symptoms in the first year of life. The lesions were mild and limited in some patients, and in others extended to involve the neck, upper thorax, lower abdomen, inguinal folds, and upper inner thighs. Hair involvement varied, ranging from alopecia universalis with follicular papules to merely sparse curly hair. All patients complained of severe itching in the lesions, but thermosensation was normal in all, even in affected areas, and no additional neurologic or sensory anomalies were detected. Histopathology of keratotic skin lesions from 3 patients showed psoriasiform hyperplasia, orthohyperkeratosis, and parakeratosis with profound mast cell infiltration in the upper dermis.; ; Larregue et al. (2000) reported 2 unrelated boys with Olmsted syndrome. In a 7.5-year-old boy, born of consanguineous Algerian parents, the disorder began at 2 years of age and progressed to ainhum-like constrictions of the fingers and painful plantar lesions that impeded walking by 4 years of age; by 7 years of age, the child was confined to bed. On examination, he had a thick, yellow PPK studded with spiny keratotic projections and a macerated base. The border was well demarcated and less thick, with a very pruritic erythematous rim. His fingernails were rough, with a ground-glass appearance; his toenails were partially destroyed. The keratoderma was malodorous, and investigation revealed bacteriologic and mycologic infection. Severe growth retardation resulted in dwarfism with a delayed bone age of 4 years. Histologic examination of a palmar biopsy specimen showed a thickened epidermis overlaid by a thick, compact horny layer that was usually orthokeratotic but included vertical, well-demarcated stacks of parakeratosis. The granular cell layer was generally thickened, but was thin or absent at the level of parakeratosis. The stratum malpighii showed psoriasiform hyperplasia. Several mitoses were seen within the basal and occasional suprabasal keratinocytes, and the mitotic index (2.5%) was greater than that of a control specimen. A biopsy from the axillary region showed similar findings, with parakeratotic horny plugs within hair follicles. The second patient was a 9-year-old boy born to nonconsanguineous Spanish parents. At the age of 6 months he developed a scaly palmar erythema that progressed to a disabling PPK. At the age of 5 years ainhum-like constrictions and flexural contractures of the fingers developed; no amputation was seen. Clinical examination revealed a thick, fissured PPK with well-defined borders extending onto the heels. Perianal erythrokeratosis and intertrigo of the inguinal folds had been present since age 2 years, and perinasal and sublabial lesions were also seen. Growth was retarded and disability was moderate.; ; Duchatelet et al. (2014) reported a 5-year-old girl with superficial peeling of the skin of her toes at birth. After she started walking at 1 year of age, plantar keratoderma developed, initially only at the pressure points but gradually extending to most of the plantar surface. From at least 3 years of age, her plantar keratoderma associated with intense, acute flares of severe itching, burning pain, erythema, and warmth involving the hands, feet, and ears. The episodes were triggered by heat and associated with venous dilation, consistent with erythermalgia (see 133020). Because of extreme foot pain, the patient walked on hands and knees, resulting in mild palmar keratoderma, and used a wheelchair from age 3 years. Other features included increased sweating, thin brittle fingernails, and fine, dry, curly, and unmanageable hair. Microscopic examination of the hair showed superficial irregularities without specific abnormalities under polarizing microscopy. Skin biopsy demonstrated hyperplastic epidermis with hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, hypergranulosis, and papillomatosis.; ; Larregue et al. (2000) reviewed 20 cases of Olmsted syndrome consisting of 18 previously published and 2 new cases, unrelated boys, from their report. Examination of skin biopsies from 1 of the boys showed features suggesting that the disorder is related to epidermal hyperproliferation, including numerous centrioles by electron microscopy, increased mitotic count by histology, and increased numbers of silver-staining nucleolar organizer regions (AgNORs) on histochemical analysis. PPK was invariably present in the 20 patients and was always painful and disabling, with spontaneous autoamputations or ainhum-like constrictions of the fingers reported in 12 cases; additional patients had annular fissures of the base of the fingers. Associated nail dystrophy was almost invariably present. Erythematokeratotic scaly periorificial lesions were present in 19 cases and associated with intertriginous dermatosis in 12; Larregue et al. (2000) noted that the female patient who lacked periorificial and intertriginous lesions (Keir, 1967) gave birth to a boy with classic OLMS (Atherton et al., 1990). Onset of symptoms was at birth in 5 patients, with onset in the remainder of the cases at 2 weeks to 30 years of age. Keratosis follicularis was present in 5 patients and associated with diffuse alopecia in 2; 4 other patients had alopecia as well. Pruritus was a major symptom in 3 patients. In 13 of the 20 patients, the disorder was purely cutaneous. Other associations in the remaining 7 patients included growth retardation in 4 patients, 3 of whom were dwarfs. Laxity of major joints was noted in 3 patients and was severe in 2 of them, and corneal abnormalities were present in 2 patients. Although the original Olmsted patient (Olmsted, 1927) had psychomotor retardation, the 19 subsequently reported cases had normal IQs. Larregue et al. (2000) noted that OLMS may predispose to the development of cancers: 1 patient had 3 squamous cell carcinomas, occurring on the palm at 26 years of age, on the toe at age 38, and the dorsum of the hand at 39.5 years, respectively.; ; Mevorah et al. (2005) reviewed and tabulated the 32 published cases of Olmsted syndrome, noting that nonperiorificial keratotic lesions on different parts of the extremities (other than palms and soles) and in the intertriginous regions were frequently mentioned, with such lesions appearing as linear, streak-like hyperkeratoses and follicular keratosis-like keratotic papules. Eye lesions were observed in 22% of affected individuals, with severe corneal involvement in 2. High-tone hearing loss and congenital deaf-mutism had been reported, as well as joint laxity. Retarded physical development was present in 25% of patients, whereas mental retardation was mentioned twice. Recurrent bacterial and/or candidal infections, primarily in the keratotic areas, were common. Osteoporosis and/or osteolysis of the hands and feet occurred in some patients. Squamous cell carcinoma developed in the area of PPK in 2 cases. There was partial cutaneous expression of Olmsted syndrome in 2 families, in which some affected individuals did not exhibit periorificial involvement.
614602	Egritas et al. (2009) reported a 4.5-year-old Turkish girl who was small for gestational age at preterm birth (32 weeks) and developed intractable mucoid and occasionally bloody diarrhea within the first 3 months of life. Examination revealed low hairline, poorly pigmented woolly hair, facial dysmorphism including square forehead, prominent cheeks, and a broad nasal root, and hepatomegaly. Microscopic hair examination showed trichorrhexis nodosa. Laboratory evaluation revealed hypochromic microcytic anemia compatible with iron deficiency, but liver enzymes were normal and stool examination was unremarkable, as were metabolic, glycosylation, chromosomal, and viral studies. Liver biopsy showed nonspecific mild chronic hepatitis; upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy was normal; and duodenal biopsy specimens showed normal villous patterns, whereas colonic mucosal biopsies showed cryptitis, cryptic abscesses, and polymorphonuclear and mononuclear infiltration in the lamina propria, consistent with a diagnosis of diffuse mild colitis with active-chronic inflammation. Egritas et al. (2009) considered this patient to represent a case of THES. She had a brother with cryptogenic liver disease who had no history of chronic diarrhea, facial dysmorphism, or hair abnormalities. Their parents were nonconsanguineous.; ; Fabre et al. (2012) studied 6 unrelated children with typical trichohepatoenteric syndrome and mutation in the SKIV2L gene, including the Turkish girl originally reported by Egritas et al. (2009). All 6 patients presented with severe and intractable diarrhea that occurred between 1 and 12 weeks after birth, hair abnormalities involving sparse, fragile, and uncombable hair, and trichorrhexis nodosa, and facial dysmorphism characterized by hypertelorism, broad flat nasal bridge, and prominent forehead. All children received parenteral nutrition, but the amount of time varied between individuals and ranged from a few weeks to several years. Immunodeficiency was mostly due to low immunoglobulin levels and to the absence of an immune response to vaccines. Fabre et al. (2012) noted that the clinical presentation in these 6 patients was indistinguishable from that of THES patients with mutation in TTC37 (see 222470).; ; Monies et al. (2015) reported 5 patients from 3 consanguineous Saudi families (families 1, 3, and 4) with THES and mutation in the SKIV2L gene. The patients shared the characteristic features of THES, including congenital intractable diarrhea, facial dysmorphisms, and woolly uncombable hair. Onset of diarrhea occurred within the first 2 weeks of life, resulting in failure to thrive and necessitating total parenteral nutrition for a period ranging from 4 months to 2 years. In addition, all 5 patients exhibited numerous congenital cafe-au-lait spots limited to skin below the waist, distributed over the pelvis and lower extremities. The 2 oldest patients (family 1), a brother (II-1) and sister (II-2) aged 23 and 14 years, respectively, underwent small bowel biopsy that revealed normal villi with active chronic inflammation; liver biopsies showed fibrosis in both sibs. The brother and a 10-year-old affected sister (II-3) also had peg teeth, but the authors suggested that given the extensive consanguinity in Saudi families, this might be associated with a second recessive condition in the family.; ; Zheng et al. (2016) described a 17-month-old Han Chinese boy with THES and mutation in the SKIV2L gene. He had intrauterine growth retardation and failure to thrive postnatally, with development of frequent watery diarrhea at age 1 month. During a hospitalization for incarcerated inguinal hernia, he was reported to have ascites and hepatic cirrhosis. At age 17 months, he had intractable diarrhea with protein energy malnutrition, poorly pigmented woolly hair that showed trichorrhexis nodosa on light microscopy, and facial dysmorphisms including square forehead, prominent cheeks, hypertelorism, and a broad nasal root. Immunologic evaluation revealed low IgG, IgM, C3, and C4 levels, and T-cell analysis showed a profile of high CD4+ and low CD8+ lymphocytes, with high CD4+/CD8+ cells and low natural killer cells. Abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly and cirrhosis. The authors considered this to represent a relatively mild phenotype, with long-term survival on oral feeding; they noted that over an 18-month follow-up period, the diarrhea persisted but there was no sign of progression of liver disease.
614607	Tsurusaki et al. (2012) reported 3 individuals with developmental delay, abnormal corpus callosum, absent/hypoplastic fifth finger/toenails, sparse scalp hair, long eyelashes, and a coarse facial appearance with wide mouth, thick lips, and abnormal ears. Seizures, ptosis, and macroglossia were not reported. All had feeding and sucking problems as well as frequent infections and cardiac findings. Two of 3 examined had short stature, and 2 of 2 examined had absent/hypoplastic fifth phalanx of hands and feet.; ; Wieczorek et al. (2013) reported a boy with CSS2. He had low frontal hairline, thick and arched eyebrows, long eyelashes, ptosis, low-set ears, thin upper and full lower vermilion borders, flat nasal bridge, broad nose, large mouth, macroglossia, and abnormal ears. Skeletal findings included brachytelephalangy with mild nail hypoplasia of all fingers and toes as well as prominent interphalangeal joints and delayed bone age. He had delayed psychomotor development with hypotonia and seizures; brain imaging showed abnormal corpus callosum.; ; Santen et al. (2013) reported 4 unrelated patients with CSS2. Clinical features included hypotonia, feeding problems, vision problems, delayed psychomotor development with poor speech, and dysmorphic facial features, including thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, flat nasal bridge, thick alae nasi, anteverted nose, thick lower vermilion, and malformed ears. Patients had general brachydactyly with hypoplastic nails and delayed dentition. Brain imaging showed agenesis of the corpus callosum in 2 patients.; ; Bidart et al. (2017) reported 4 patients with similar microduplications on chromosome 1p36.11 involving the ARID1A gene. Patient 1 had originally been reported by Coutton et al. (2013). The patients shared a similar phenotype consisting primarily of microcephaly, impaired intellectual development, delayed motor milestones, hand and foot anomalies, growth impairment, constipation, frequent airway infections, dysmorphic facial features, and stereotypies. All patients had a characteristic nasal tip with notched alae nasi and a low columella. Deficiency of the lateral vermilion border of the upper lip was also seen, as well as a high forehead and sparse hair. The feet were very distinctive, with brachydactyly and shortening and medial deviation of the great toes. Two genes, ARID1A and PIGV, were included in the minimal critical region; the ARID1A gene was fully duplicated, whereas the PIGV gene was partially included. Two of the patients were hypotonic, 3 had stereotypical behaviors, and none had seizures. Age at the time of the report ranged from 6 to 34 years.
614608	Tsurusaki et al. (2012) identified SMARCB1 mutations in 4 patients with Coffin-Siris syndrome. All had developmental delay and hypotonia; 2 of 3 examined had microcephaly, 2 of 3 had a small cerebellum; 2 of the 4 had seizures, and neither of 2 examined had Dandy-Walker malformation. Three of the 4 had hearing loss. All 4 had absent or hypoplastic fifth finger or toenails, sparse scalp hair, thick eyebrows, and long eyelashes. Three of 3 examined had abnormal delayed dentition, 2 of 3 had nonfunctioning or absent tear duct, and 3 of the 4 were hirsute. All 4 were described as having a coarse facial appearance with broad nose, wide mouth, thick lips, abnormal ears, and a high palate. All 4 had short stature, 3 of the 4 had spinal anomalies, and all had feeding problems. Absent hypoplastic fifth phalanx of the hand and the foot and delayed bone age were found in 1 patient examined for these. Other phenotypic features were more variable. Two patients for whom pictures were presented, while dysmorphic, did not resemble each other.; ; In studies of large cohorts of patients with CSS, Wieczorek et al. (2013) and Santen et al. (2013) found that those with CSS3 had the most severe phenotype compared to patients with other forms of CSS. In addition to the typical facial gestalt, hypertrichosis, and hypoplastic or absent fifth finger- and toenails associated with hypoplasia of other nails, these patients had poor overall growth, short stature, microcephaly, severe developmental delay, and feeding problems. Many patients also had seizures, congenital heart defects, hearing impairment, small cerebellum, and abnormal corpus callosum.
614609	Tsurusaki et al. (2012) described 6 patients with Coffin-Siris syndrome. All 6 had developmental delay, 4 had hypotonia, and 4 of 5 examined had microcephaly. Two of the 6 had seizures, and 1 of 5 examined had a Dandy-Walker malformation. Five of the 6 had vision problems and half had hearing problems; all had absent or hypoplastic fifth fingernails or toenails; all were hirsute; and 3 of the 6 had sparse scalp hair. All had thick eyebrows and long eyelashes.
614613	Michot et al. (2012) reported 4 unrelated patients, ranging in age from 3 to 7 years, with acrodysostosis-2. All had advanced bone age, facial dysostosis with nasal hypoplasia and depressed nasal bridge, severe brachydactyly with short metacarpals, metatarsals, and phalanges, and cone-shaped epiphyses. All also had intellectual disability with speech and psychomotor retardation. One had intrauterine growth retardation, but none had short stature. None had evidence of hormone resistance, except 1 who had increased parathyroid hormone (PTH). Two patients developed intracranial hypertension due to sinus thrombosis. Michot et al. (2012) also reported 5 patients with ACRDYS1. Comparison of the 2 groups revealed interesting genotype-phenotype correlations. Those with PRKAR1A mutations had hormone resistance, short stature, normal intellect, and no facial dysostosis, whereas those with PDE4D mutations had characteristic facial features, namely midface hypoplasia with the nasal hypoplasia, moderate intellectual disability with speech delay, and lack of hormone resistance in 3 of the 4.; ; Lee et al. (2012) reported 3 unrelated patients with ACRDYS2. All had small hands and midface hypoplasia, 2 had mild short stature, and 2 had lumbar stenosis. One had normal psychomotor development, 1 had significantly impaired development, and the third had mild developmental disability. One had congenital hypothyroidism, 1 had cryptorchidism, and 1 had no endocrine abnormalities. Two of the patients had previously been reported by Graham et al. (2001) (as case R1 and case 2, respectively). Additional features noted by Graham et al. (2001) included maxillonasal hypoplasia, brachydactyly, cone-shaped epiphyses, and intrauterine growth retardation. Lee et al. (2012) also identified 2 patients with ACRDYS1 due to mutations in the PRKAR1A gene. In a comparison of the phenotypes, Lee et al. (2012) concluded that it was difficult to distinguish the patients clinically. Both groups had mild short stature with brachydactyly, facial dysostosis, and spinal stenosis; both groups had variable endocrine abnormalities; and 4 of the 5 patients had some degree of developmental disability.; ; Lynch et al. (2013) reported 4 unrelated patients with sporadic ACRDYS2 and 1 family in which 3 sibs had the disorder. All patients had typical features, including round face, hypoplastic nares with upturned nose, and maxillary hypoplasia. In addition, several individuals had a flattened nasal bridge, hypertelorism, and epicanthal folds. Skeletal abnormalities included brachydactyly and shortening of the metacarpals and metatarsals with relative sparing of the first toe. None had evidence of decreased interpedicular distance. All had some degree of learning disability, developmental delay, and/or intellectual disability. Five patients had obesity, and 5 had eczema, chronic rhinitis, or asthma. Males tended to have cryptorchidism or hypospadias. Only 1 patient had short stature and only 1 had congenital hypothyroidism, suggesting that endocrine abnormalities are not common in this disorder. The father of the affected sibs showed subtle abnormalities, including brachydactyly and mild learning disability.; ; Lindstrand et al. (2014) reported 5 unrelated children with ACRDYS2. The patients had a typical phenotype, with nasal, midface, and maxillary hypoplasia, intellectual disability, and skeletal abnormalities. All patients were disproportionate with short extremities and brachydactyly; 2 had spinal stenosis. Four patients had red hair, and all had blue eyes, regardless of parental eye and hair color. Four had mild or transient parathyroid hormone resistance. One had cryptorchidism, 1 had type 1 diabetes and lack of pubertal growth spurt, and 1 had severe hypertension. The findings suggested that patients with ACRDYS2 also have endocrine abnormalities and should be followed for such.
614614	Chen et al. (1995) identified a form of autosomal dominant nonsyndromic deafness in members of a large multigenerational family in which fluctuating, though inexorably progressive, sensorineural hearing loss began in the second decade and led to severe to profound impairment by the age of 40 years.; ; Wang et al. (2015) reported a multigenerational Chinese family with onset of sensorineural hearing loss between 10 and 28 years of age. Only 1 patient had onset at age 3, and this was associated with aminoglycoside exposure. The hearing loss was progressive, resulting in moderately severe to profound deafness. Almost all patients reported high-frequency tinnitus at the onset of hearing loss. None had vestibular impairment.
614615	Joubert et al. (1969) described 4 French Canadian sibs, born of distantly related parents, with a severe neurologic disorder characterized by episodic hyperpnea, abnormal eye movements, ataxia, and global psychomotor retardation. Partial or complete agenesis of the cerebellar vermis was demonstrated by autopsy or pneumoencephalogram. One patient also had an occipital meningomyelocele. The oldest living sib was 8 years old.; ; Srour et al. (2012) reported 10 patients from 7 French Canadian families with Joubert syndrome. Two sibs were part of the original family described by Joubert et al. (1969). All patients showed global developmental delay, with the onset of independent walking between 30 months and 8 years of age. Cognitive impairment was present in all individuals but was variable, ranging from borderline intelligence to mild intellectual disability. Most also showed oculomotor apraxia and breathing abnormalities, mainly episodic hyperventilation. Two individuals had limb abnormalities; 1 had preaxial and postaxial polydactyly, and another had syndactyly of the third and fourth fingers on 1 hand. Brain MRI showed the molar tooth sign in all patients examined. None had evidence of retinal or kidney involvement.; ; In a comprehensive study of 279 patients from 232 unrelated families with Joubert syndrome in whom a genetic basis was determined by molecular analysis of 27 candidate genes, Bachmann-Gagescu et al. (2015) found a significant association between mutations in the C5ORF42 gene and polydactyly (odds ratio (OR) of 2.7).
614616	Fiskerstrand et al. (2012) studied 32 affected and 14 unaffected individuals from 3 branches of a large pedigree segregating autosomal dominant early-onset chronic diarrhea. The diarrhea started in infancy and was fairly constant over the years, but improved by middle age in some. Patients had an average of 3.6 stools per day, which typically were watery or of loose consistency and were accompanied by gaseous distention of the abdomen (meteorism) and in some cases abdominal pain. Eight patients were hospitalized as newborns for dehydration, metabolic acidosis, and electrolyte disturbances. Four family members had been diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome although they did not meet strict criteria for diagnosis; however, 5 other cases did meet the criteria. Most family members reported food sensitivities, and several limited their intake of fruits, vegetables, and sweets. Ten patients underwent laparotomy for suspected bowel obstruction, and in 8 cases, obstruction due to volvulus, adhesions, or ileal inflammation was confirmed. Of 5 patients who underwent bowel resection, 4 had verified or suspected Crohn disease (see 266600), as did 3 other affected family members, and another patient was diagnosed with possible eosinophilic enteritis. Fiskerstrand et al. (2012) noted that there were several other conditions present in affected family members that might be associated with the inherited disorder, including vitamin B12 deficiency in 6 patients, esophagitis with or without esophageal hernia in 5, and urolithiasis in 4.
614617	Ali et al. (2012) reported a consanguineous Pakistani family in which 11 individuals had prelingual onset of profound hearing loss affecting all frequencies. There were no additional features or history of vestibular difficulties, but sophisticated testing of vestibular function was not performed.
614618	Rees et al. (2006) reported 7 patients, including 2 sibs, with hyperekplexia. Affected individuals presented with neonatal hypertonia, an exaggerated startle response to tactile or acoustic stimuli, and life-threatening neonatal apnea episodes. Notably, in some cases, symptoms resolved in the first year of life.
614619	Rees et al. (2002) reported a male neonate who presented with generalized hypertonia and hyperreactivity 3 hours after birth. He had an exaggerated startle response and myoclonus elicited by testing the tendon reflexes or tapping on the back. Moro reflex was absent. Hyperreflexia and exaggerated startle response were noted until about 1 year of age, and then decreased somewhat. He had slightly delayed motor development, but normal mental development. By age 3 years, the phenotype had improved such that an abnormal startle response could only be invoked by tactile stimulus of the perioral region. He also had a hiatal hernia with gastroesophageal reflux.; ; Al-Owain et al. (2012) reported a large consanguineous Saudi Arabian kindred in which 9 individuals had hyperekplexia. All showed increased fetal movements and generalized stiffness at birth. The stiffness tended to ameliorate with age. Three patients had a positive reflex test, 2 of whom showed a positive glabellar test. Seven patients had esotropia. Two girls had social phobia and 1 boy had attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. All had normal cognition, except 1 girl with seizures and a possible history of meningitis in infancy. The patients had a favorable response to clonazepam or vigabatrin, and 2 patients were able to stop treatment at ages 8 and 3 years, respectively.; ; Gupta et al. (2020) reported a boy who presented at 28 days of life with an exaggerated startle response to tactile and auditory stimuli and was diagnosed with neonatal hyperekplexia. The baby also had generalized tonic seizures and hypertonia with opisthotonic posturing. Treatment with clonazepam and levetiracetam was initiated. At the age of 4.5 years, he continued to have intermittent episodes of tonic spasms as well as hyperactivity and sensory processing issues.
614621	Nardo et al. (2009) reported a 15-year-old French girl with UV-sensitive syndrome. She presented at age 4 months with sun sensitivity manifest as easy sun burning and erythema. She had numerous freckles on her face and exposed areas of the neck, but no history or evidence of cutaneous tumors. Psychomotor development was normal. Patient-derived fibroblasts showed a reduced recovery of RNA synthesis after UV irradiation and a defective capacity to repair UV-induced damage on the transcribed strand of active genes, indicating a defect in transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER). However, there was no hypersensitivity to reactive oxygen species, and UV-induced DNA repair synthesis and global genome NER (GG-NER) were normal.
614640	Fujiwara et al. (1985) reported a 16-year-old Japanese girl (XP24KO) with mild photosensitivity reminiscent of xeroderma pigmentosum (see, e.g., 278700). She had an acute sun sensitivity reaction without blistering at age 1 year. Small pigmented freckles and telangiectases were noted on her face at age 11-12 years. She had no neoplasia and no other abnormalities. Patient fibroblasts were twice as sensitive to UV killing as normal cells, and were reported to show a reduced level (30-55%) of unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS) after irradiation. The patient was initially assigned to XP complementation group E (278740). However, reinvestigation of the XP24KO cells by Itoh et al. (2000) showed normal UDS and nucleotide excision repair, but decreased recovery of RNA synthesis after UV irradiation; the phenotype was reclassified as UVSS.; ; Kawada et al. (1986) reported a 5-year-old Japanese girl (XP70TO) with mild symptoms of xeroderma pigmentosum. She had neither skin malignancies nor neurologic abnormalities. Cellular studies showed UV sensitivity and reduced UV-induced unscheduled DNA synthesis, and the patient was initially assigned to XP complementation group E. However, cellular studies on XP70TO by Nakazawa et al. (2012) showed nearly normal UDS and markedly defective RRS, consistent with UVSS.; ; Itoh et al. (1994, 1996) reported 2 teenaged Japanese sibs with mild clinical manifestations similar to those of xeroderma pigmentosum: acute sunburn, dryness with freckling and pigmentation anomalies of sun-exposed skin, and telangiectasia without neurologic abnormalities or tumors. Each showed photosensitivity at about 6 months of age, with erythema and edema on sun-exposed skin a few hours after exposure. Patient cells showed impaired RRS after UV irradiation, although unscheduled DNA synthesis was normal. The patients did not belong to any complementation group of the xeroderma pigmentosum (XP; e.g., 278730) or Cockayne (CSB; 133540) syndromes. Itoh et al. (1995) found that postreplication repair in cells derived from these patients was normal, indicating that they could not be classified as XP variant. Neither transfection nor microinjection of the cells with the human DNA repair gene ERCC1 (126380), which is known not to correct any complementation groups of XP or CS, failed to correct the defect of these cells, indicating that they do not belong to the rodent complementation group 1. However, the defect in recovery of RNA synthesis after UV irradiation was restored by microinjection of HeLa cell extract. The cellular characteristics such as UV sensitivity and defective RRS after UV irradiation with normal unscheduled DNA synthesis were reminiscent of Cockayne syndrome. On the basis of these results, Itoh et al. (1995) proposed that these patients be included under a general category designated 'UV-sensitive syndrome.'
614643	Chitayat et al. (1995) reported a 37-week-old fetus who was found to have hydrocephalus and retinal detachment on prenatal ultrasound, leading to a diagnosis of WWS. Fetal movements were weak. After delivery, the baby was hypotonic, in a 'frog leg' position, and did not move or cry. He had large fontanels, frontal bossing, deep-set eyes, retrognathia, and small, simple, low-set ears. The eyes had central circular defects in the posterior cornea with abnormal adhesions and anterior segment anomalies consistent with a variant of Peters anomaly. Brain MRI showed hydrocephalus, type II lissencephaly, and cerebellar hypoplasia. He died at age 3 months. Vajsar et al. (2000) performed skeletal muscle studies of the patient reported by Chitayat et al. (1995). Skeletal muscle biopsy showed dystrophic changes and disruption in the basal lamina. Laminin alpha-2 (LAMA2; 156225) immunostaining was normal.; ; Kanoff et al. (1998) reported a male infant with WWS. He had macrocephaly, low-set ears, unilateral microphthalmia, cataract, and optic nerve hypoplasia. He had a weak cry, facial weakness, and generalized profound hypotonia with absent reflexes. Brain MRI showed ventriculomegaly, a Dandy-Walker malformation, and agyria. Serum creatine kinase was increased, and skeletal muscle biopsy showed necrotic fibers and variation in myofiber diameter, consistent with muscular dystrophy. He died at age 6 months of respiratory impairment. Postmortem examination showed lissencephaly, absence of the posterior cerebellar vermis, atrophy of the corpus callosum, and subcortical heterotopia. There was a decrease in LAMA2 expression in muscle fibers.; ; Willer et al. (2012) reported 7 patients, including 2 sibs, with MDDGA7 confirmed by genetic analysis. All had a diagnosis of Walker-Warburg syndrome. Two of the patients were those reported by Chitayat et al. (1995) and Kanoff et al. (1998). One additional patient was described in detail by Willer et al. (2012). Brain MRI performed at 3 days and at 5 months of age showed hydrocephalus, cobblestone lissencephaly of the cerebral cortex, and severe brainstem and cerebellar hypoplasia. The patient also had severe muscular dystrophy with increased serum creatine kinase, bilateral microphthalmia, cataracts, and arrested retinal development. Immunofluorescence and protein blot analysis of skeletal muscle showed a typical alpha-dystroglycan glycosylation defect, with loss of both functional glycosylation and receptor function. Fibroblasts from 5 other patients showed a complete loss of functional glycosylation and laminin binding, as well as hypoglycosylation of core alpha-dystroglycan. All patients had a similar phenotype, with muscular dystrophy and brain and eye anomalies. Most died by age 2 years.; ; Roscioli et al. (2012) reported 9 families with WWS/MEB. One large consanguineous family had 3 affected members. All affected individuals had a severe phenotype, with cobblestone lissencephaly, hydrocephalus, cerebellar hypoplasia, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, as well as eye anomalies, such as microphthalmia, cataract, anterior chamber defects, and glaucoma. All had hypotonia and increased serum creatine kinase, and muscle histology showed dystrophic changes and a reduction of glycosylated alpha-dystroglycan. Most died by age 2 years, but 2 patients survived past age 2 and were thus categorized as having MEB.; ; Vuillaumier-Barrot et al. (2012) reported 8 fetuses from 5 unrelated families with MDDGA7. The probands were ascertained from a larger study of patients with severe diffuse cobblestone lissencephaly. Additional more variable clinical features included neural tube defects (in 4 patients), limb deformations (in 3), visceral malformations (in 2), brain vascular anomalies (in 2), and retinal dysplasia (in all 5 that were examined). One patient had gonadal dysgenesis.
614650	Heeringa et al. (2011) reported 11 children from 5 families with autosomal recessive coenzyme Q10 deficiency manifest as nephrotic syndrome. Nine of the 11 patients had sensorineural deafness. The patients presented with proteinuria at a median age of 1.2 years (range, 0.2-6.4 years) and progressed to end-stage renal failure at a median age of 1.7 years (range, 0.4-9.3 years). Five children died in early childhood (median age of 5.0 years). Renal biopsy showed focal segmental glomerulosclerosis in 7 patients and diffuse mesangial sclerosis (DMS) in 1. Other abnormalities included seizures in 1 patient, and white matter abnormalities, seizures, and multiorgan failure in another. Two other patients had ataxia and facial dysmorphism, respectively. Three patients showed variable, but favorable, response to oral coenzyme Q treatment.; ; Park et al. (2017) reported 6 unrelated Korean children with steroid-resistant focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and hearing loss. The mean age of onset of nephrotic syndrome was 29 months (range, 15-47 months), and all 6 patients progressed to end-stage renal failure within a median of 13 months (range, 1-27 months). Kidney biopsy showed FSGS in all of the patients, including a collapsing variant in 3 patients. Electron microscopy revealed abnormal mitochondrial proliferation in the podocytes of all 6 patients. Five of the patients underwent kidney transplantation, and none of them had recurrence of kidney disease. Two of the patients had ocular manifestations, including 1 patient with bilateral optic nerve atrophy and 1 patient with exotropia and nystagmus of both eyes. Two of the patients had mild muscle weakness of the lower extremities.; ; Yuruk Yildirim et al. (2020) reported a 7-year-old girl who presented with steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome and received a diagnosis of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis based on renal biopsy. She received a kidney transplant 1 year later. She also had bilateral sensorineural hearing loss confirmed with brainstem auditory evoked response testing, but no additional extrarenal manifestations. Her older brother was diagnosed with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss at the age of 10 years and had no renal disease. The diagnosis of COQ10D6 was made after kidney transplant in the younger sib. After diagnosis, both sibs were started on coenzyme Q10, but hearing did not improve in either patient.
614651	Mollet et al. (2007) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Moroccan parents, in which CoQ10 deficiency was manifest as a multisystem disorder with early-onset deafness, optic atrophy, mild mental retardation, peripheral neuropathy, obesity, livedo reticularis, and cardiac valvulopathy. The patients were 22 and 14 years old at the time of the report. Enzymologic analysis showed low quinone-dependent oxidative phosphorylation activity in affected members, and CoQ10 deficiency was confirmed by restoration of oxidative phosphorylation activity after quinone addition. Patient fibroblasts showed low CoQ10 levels. Both were found to have a mutation in the PDSS1 gene.; ; Vasta et al. (2012) reported a patient with COQ10D2 who had developmental delay, nephrotic syndrome, and failure to thrive; he died at 16 months of age. A brain MRI showed multifocal abnormal signals in the posterior temporal and periventricular white matter and brainstem. The patient's white blood cell coenzyme Q10 level was significantly reduced.; ; Nardecchia et al. (2021) described 2 sibs, aged 16 and 6 years, with COQ10D2. The older sib had delayed language at 15 months of age. At 4 years of age she was diagnosed with profound bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. After she received hearing aids, she was able to speak simple sentences. She was diagnosed with mild intellectual disability. At 14 years of age she was evaluated for progressive vision loss, and bilateral optic atrophy was diagnosed. On examination she had diffuse mild muscle weakness and an upper limb postural tremor. The younger sib had mild intellectual disability, optic atrophy, muscle weakness, and sensorineural hearing loss.; ; Bellusci et al. (2021) reported a boy with COQ10D2 who presented at 5 months of age with failure to thrive, feeding difficulties, hearing loss, pulmonary hypertension, livedo reticularis, and distal phalangeal erythema. Brain MRI at 12 months of age showed white matter cystic changes of the brain. Laboratory testing demonstrated elevated lactic acid, decreased coenzyme Q10 in lymphocytes, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, and tricarboxylic aciduria. He developed a progressive disorder with severe developmental delay, pyramidal dysfunction, tremors, optic atrophy, seizures, and heart failure. He died at 3 years of age.
614652	Lopez et al. (2006) described a male infant, born of unrelated white parents, who presented with neonatal pneumonia and hypotonia. At age 3 months, he developed refractory left-sided seizures with secondary generalization, despite various combinations of antiepileptic drugs. He became progressively floppy and had difficulties feeding because of exhaustion. At age 7 months, severe episodic vomiting prompted duodenal tube feeding, and he rapidly developed widespread edema. Low serum albumin of 4.3 g/liter and massive proteinuria led to the diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome. Serum lactate was markedly elevated. The absence of purposeful gaze and visual evoked-potential responses, together with normal funduscopic findings, suggested cortical blindness. Brain MRI showed changes in the basal ganglia consistent with Leigh syndrome (256000). Muscle biopsy and fibroblasts showed primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency, as well as a defect in activity of mitochondrial complex II+III. Oral therapy with CoQ10 supplementation did not lead to clinical improvement. The patient died at age 8 months due to severe status epilepticus.
614653	Edvardson et al. (2012) reported a large consanguineous family of Ashkenazi Jewish descent in which 3 infants and 1 fetus had a severe form of sensory and autonomic neuropathy with joint contractures. All had neonatal hypotonia with poor feeding and poor respiratory effort with apneic spells necessitating artificial ventilation. Features consistent with HSAN included alacrima and absent corneal reflexes with subsequent corneal scarring, decreased fungiform papillae, absent deep tendon reflexes, absence of an axon flare with intradermal histamine, recurrent hyperpyrexia, and episodic bradycardia or tachycardia with labile blood pressure. Two had episodic erythematous blotching of the skin. One was noted to have decreased pain response. Flexion contractions of the hands were present; 1 also had limited hip extension and 2 had clubfeet. Two had paucity of facial expression with persistently open mouth. Mild dysmorphic features, including low-set ears, high-arched palate, and small chin were noted in 1 infant. Brain MRI was normal in all 3 patients, and none had seizures. However, there was essentially no neurologic development, and all died by age 2 years. Edvardson et al. (2012) noted the phenotypic similarities to HSAN3 (223900).; ; Fortugno et al. (2019) reported 3 adult sibs, born to nonconsanguineous parents of Italian ancestry, with HSAN6. The female proband was first seen at age 56 years with poorly healing ulcerations of the feet and painless fractures since the age of 26 years that resulted in persistent osteomyelitis, disarticulations and amputations of the toes, and joint deformities. She also had autonomic disturbances and severe pain insensitivity. One of her brothers was first evaluated at age 63 years and presented with bilateral ulcerations of the feet associated with painless fractures since age 37 years with recurrent septic osteoarthritis, disarticulations and amputations of toes, and joint deformities. He also had autonomic disturbances, sensorineural hearing loss, pupillary abnormalities, urinary incontinence, and severe pain insensitivity. Another brother was examined at age 70 years with distal bilateral ulcerations of the feet with painless fractures since a young age that resulted in recurrence septic osteoarthritis, toe amputations, and joint deformities. All 3 patients were also diagnosed with type 2 diabetes.; ; Manganelli et al. (2017) identified 3 adult brothers affected with HSAN-VI who were born to healthy nonconsanguineous Italian parents. The brothers had onset in infancy of severely impaired pain sensitivity resulting in poor healing of distal ulcerations, finger or toe amputations, and joint deformities. Development was normal. Sensations to pain, touch, and vibration were reduced, and deep tendon reflexes were absent. The patients also had autonomic disturbances, including reduced sweating with heat intolerance in all 3, absent pupillary light reflexes in 2, chronic diarrhea in all 3, and erectile dysfunction in 1. Nerve conduction studies showed a severe axonal sensory neuropathy. A lack of sensory and autonomic nerve fibers was seen on skin biopsy.
614654	Rahman et al. (2001) reported a boy, the seventh child of healthy unrelated Pakistani parents, who presented in the first day of life with poor feeding, hypothermia, and seizures. There was a possible history of reduced fetal movements in the last trimester. Physical examination showed a passive neonate, unresponsive to his immediate environment, with a weak cry. He had generalized increased peripheral tone with decreased truncal tone. He also had lactic acidosis, renal tubulopathy, and mild left ventricular hypertrophy with global hypokinesia. MRI of the brain showed generalized cerebral and cerebellar atrophy and abnormal parenchyma. Muscle biopsy at 10 months of age showed CoQ10 deficiency. Family history revealed that 5 older sibs were healthy, but another sib had died on day 1 of life with seizures, aminoaciduria, and acidosis. The mother had previously had 5 first-trimester miscarriages. Danhauser et al. (2016) reported a male infant, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with COQ10D5. He was born at 36 weeks' gestation due to anhydramnion. He was small for gestational age and showed poor respiratory effort, hypotonia, bradycardia, and severe lactic acidosis. Cranial ultrasound showed multiple choroid plexus cysts and abnormal signals in the basal ganglia, suggesting a neonatal Leigh-like syndrome. He had reduced spontaneous movements with intermittent opisthotonus, seizures, and recurrent episodes of apnea, and died at 18 days of age. Patient fibroblasts showed reduced activity of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex II/III and decreased CoQ10; histologic analysis of muscle and liver biopsy were unremarkable.
614662	Lawson et al. (2011) studied 2 unrelated boys who presented at 8 years and 13 years of age, respectively, with hyperandrogenism and premature pseudopuberty with biochemical features of cortisone reductase deficiency. The 8-year-old boy had premature pubarche and advanced bone age, whereas the 13-year-old boy had recent-onset obesity with clinical signs suggestive of insulin resistance (acanthosis nigricans) and hyperandrogenemia. Measurement of urinary cortisone and cortisol metabolites revealed abnormally low THF plus 5-alpha-THF/THE ratios in both patients; the cortols-to-cortolone ratio, which reflects the secondary metabolism of cortisol and cortisone, was also low compared to age- and sex-specific reference values. Absolute levels of cortisol metabolites were low to normal, but those of cortisone metabolites were very high, consistent with a blockage in 11-beta-HSD1 (HSD11B1; 600713)-mediated cortisone-to-cortisol conversion. Analysis of family members revealed that both boys' mothers had urine biochemistry identical to those of their offspring, whereas the fathers had normal values. Calculated cortisol secretion rates, based on summation of all cortisol and cortisone metabolites, appeared to be increased in the boys and their mothers, but levels for the fathers were within the reference range. Androgen metabolite excretion levels were markedly elevated in both boys and were in the upper range of normal or higher in their mothers, whereas excretion in the fathers was normal.
614665	Tal et al. (1985) reported a consanguineous Bedouin family in which 4 of 12 sibs had meconium ileus with normal sweat electrolytes. Two of the affected sibs also developed chronic diarrhea in infancy, 1 of whom died at 4 months of age from sepsis and severe malnutrition; postmortem examination revealed no pathologic findings consistent with cystic fibrosis. During long-term follow-up of the 3 surviving affected sibs there was no clinical evidence of steatorrhea, repeat smears did not show fat in the stool, and trypsin activity in the stools was qualitatively normal. No pulmonary abnormalities suggestive of CF were found clinically, radiographically, histologically, or on lung function tests. The parents and 8 other sibs were healthy and had normal sweat electrolytes. Romi et al. (2012) stated that intestinal biopsy in 3 of the affected sibs demonstrated normal ganglions and cholinergic neurons.
614669	Storm et al. (2005) reported 20 individuals from 4 unrelated families with auriculocondylar syndrome. Common features in the probands included cupped ears with overfolding of the superior helices, a cleft at the junction of the lobule and the helix, and preauricular and postauricular tags. In 1 patient, the left lobule was completely separated from the remainder of the external ear and was attached to the skin inferior to the helix. Other common features included micrognathia, microstomia, and a round facial appearance with prominent cheeks. Two probands had low-set, posteriorly rotated ears, and 1 had absence of the mandibular condyle. One patient had ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and a very posterior tongue overlying the more anterior larynx, requiring a permanent tracheostomy. All patients showed normal growth and development without hearing loss. In a literature review of 14 patients, Storm et al. (2005) found that the most common clinical signs were abnormalities of the TMJ/condyle (100%), ear constriction (96.8%), micrognathia (71%), abnormal palate (62.5%), prominent cheeks (57.1%), microstomia (51.9%), glossoptosis (45.5%), respiratory distress (36.4%), stenotic ear canals (30%), and hearing loss (21%). Some patients may need orthodontic treatment, speech therapy, or orthognathic surgery. Storm et al. (2005) noted that the phenotype is highly variable, even within families. Gerkes et al. (2008) reported a 4-week-old boy with question mark ears, postauricular tags, micrognathia, and a small mouth. The authors stated that review of the literature indicated that postauricular tags had not been described in other syndromes or as an isolated finding, in contrast to the more common preauricular tags. Gerkes et al. (2008) concluded that postauricular tags should be considered part of the primary question mark ear malformation. Kokitsu-Nakata et al. (2012) reported 4 patients from a 3-generation family and an unrelated Brazilian girl with auriculocondylar syndrome. The 7-year-old Brazilian girl (patient 1) had feeding difficulties and respiratory distress at birth. The proband in the multiplex family (patient 2) was a 6-year-old girl. Clinical examination of both girls showed round face with puffy cheeks, microsomia, severe micrognathia, and limited mouth opening. Patient 2 also had submucous cleft palate and malocclusion. Both had large low-set ears that were constricted at the junction of the upper two-thirds and lower third of the pinna. Orthopantography showed mandibular condyle hypoplasia and marked mandibular ramus hypoplasia. Affected relatives of patient 2 exhibited phenotypic variability and included her father, who had mild facial asymmetry, prominent cheeks, mild micrognathia, and mild ear anomaly; her paternal aunt, who showed facial asymmetry, micrognathia, and typical question mark ears; and her paternal grandmother, who had mild facial asymmetry and mild ear anomaly. In addition, 2 paternal cousins were said to have ear anomalies and micrognathia, and another paternal cousin had cleft palate. Romanelli Tavares et al. (2017) restudied the 2 probands, noting that in addition to the previously reported features, the Brazilian girl (patient 1) also had glossoptosis and agenesis of the second molar, and patient 2 at age 10 years showed delayed bone age, abnormal uvula, and mild speech disorder. Gordon et al. (2013) studied 7 ARCND probands with monoallelic mutations in the PLCB4 gene. One was an Omani boy who presented with neonatal hypotonia, developmental delay, feeding difficulties, and upper airway obstruction. He was diagnosed with ARCND based on micrognathia, with hypoplastic mandibular ramus on CT scan, full cheeks, microstomia, difficulty opening his mouth, and low-set question mark ears. A skin tag anterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle was believed to be a remnant of the completely detached left ear lobe. Gordon et al. (2013) also studied a 3-generation family segregating question mark ears in an autosomal dominant pattern; the proband and her paternal grandfather were bilaterally affected, whereas her father had only a right-sided deformity. Although the family had originally been reported by Shkalim et al. (2008) as representing isolated question mark ears (612798), Gordon et al. (2013) observed that the lower jaws of the proband and her father were mildly dysplastic, and that some degree of mandibular dysplasia may have been present in the paternal grandfather; however, permission was not granted to publish photographs and the authors were unable to assess x-rays or mandibular scans in this family. Gordon et al. (2013) reviewed reports of sleep studies performed in ARCND patients and found evidence for central apnea in some cases after distraction surgery, a procedure that they noted should reduce obstructive apnea events and unmask central events, if present. Nabil et al. (2020) reported a 3-generation Egyptian family with ARCND and mutation in the PLCB4 gene. The proband was a 6-year-old girl who presented with snoring, obstructive sleep apnea, difficulties with mastication and speech articulation, and dental malalignment. Examination revealed a round face with full cheeks, prominent question mark ears (QMEs), and severe mandibular hypoplasia that was more pronounced on the right, causing facial asymmetry. Her 17-year-old male cousin was similarly affected, and imaging in both showed mandibular condyle hypoplasia, asymmetric mandible, short mandibular rami, and temporomandibular joint (TMJ) abnormalities with ankylosis. Their fathers were more mildly affected: the proband's father had bilateral QMEs, full cheeks, and thick prominent lips with no microretrognathia, and her cousin's father had bilateral ear constrictions with clefting at the junction of the lobule and helix, prominent cheeks, and noticeable asymmetric retrognathia. Neither parent had TMJ problems, although both exhibited patchy absence of facial hair along the proximal jawline. In addition, the deceased paternal grandmother was said to have had QMEs.
614671	Shinawi et al. (2010) identified 27 individuals with a 16p11.2 deletion and 18 with a 16p11.2 duplication, accounting for 0.6% of 7,400 samples submitted for testing, most commonly for developmental delay and mental retardation. Ten patients with duplications were examined in detail. Among 5 families with duplication, 3 duplications were de novo and 2 were inherited, 1 from a slightly dysmorphic and microcephalic mother and the other from a cognitively impaired and microcephalic mother. Deletions or duplications within this region were not observed in 194 normal parental samples. Although neither group constituted a clearly clinically recognizable syndromes, there were some common phenotypic features. All probands showed speech/language delay and cognitive impairment. Those with duplications were more grossly dysmorphic compared to the deletion cases, but there was no recognizable pattern except microcephaly. Only 3 of 16 patients with the 16p11.2 deletion met criteria for autism, and only 2 with duplications had autistic features. However, patients from both groups had an increased incidence of other behavioral problems, most commonly attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. All the deletions and duplications appeared to be recurrent and reciprocal, with a minimum size of 579 kb. Breakpoint analysis identified 2 major families of low copy repeat (LCR) regions, 147 kb and 72 kb repeats, respectively, that contributed to the genomic complexity in this region. Shinawi et al. (2010) emphasized the incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity of clinical findings in patients with these genomic abnormalities. Fernandez et al. (2010) reported 5 autistic probands with copy number variation (CNV) at 16p11.2, including 3 with deletions and 2 with duplications, and 1 proband with duplication and developmental delay and autistic-like features. Proband 4 in the report, with a de novo duplication, had autism, epilepsy, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, hypertelorism, smooth philtrum, small ears, long slender fingers and toes, and decreased height and weight. Proband 5 was a 13-year-old girl who had an inherited duplication that was also present in her unaffected mother and sister. The last proband was a 26-month-old girl with autistic-like features and developmental delay who had inherited the duplication from her father, who had bipolar disorder. The child had frontal bossing with receding hairline, hypoplastic supraorbital ridges, sparse eyebrows and eyelashes, deep-set eyes, smooth philtrum, thin upper lip, and a flat facial profile. Fernandez et al. (2010) noted the extensive phenotypic variability in these patients, as some deletion-positive ASD probands had less severe phenotypes as deletion-negative ASD sibs. Compared with the microduplications, the microdeletions were more likely to be penetrant and to be associated with nonspecific major or minor dysmorphism. The results also indicated incomplete penetrance and supported the concept that sex difference provides a relative advantage in protecting females against the development of ASD even when a rare CNV is present.Schaaf et al. (2011) reported 2 unrelated boys with heterozygous deletions of 16p11.2 and a third boy with a duplication of this region. The duplication patient had autism, academic deficits, mild mental retardation, attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder, anxiety, and behavioral problems. The patient with the duplication, who had a prominent neurobehavioral phenotype, inherited the duplication from his mother, who had an anxiety disorder; the maternal side of the family had a strong history of variable psychiatric disorders. The minimal size of the rearrangement in all 3 patients was 579 kb.
614672	Theis et al. (2011) studied a consanguineous family of Norwegian ancestry segregating autosomal recessive dilated cardiomyopathy and a mutation in the GATAD1 gene. The proband was a 74-year-old woman who presented at age 50 with heart failure and cardiomegaly; echocardiography was diagnostic for CMD. Left ventricular endomyocardial biopsy showed moderate myocyte hypertrophy, mild focal interstitial fibrosis, and mild diffuse endocardial fibrosis, consistent with chronic cardiomyopathy. At the time of evaluation, she had New York Heart Association class II heart failure with moderate to severe left ventricular enlargement and an ejection fraction of 25%. A 76-year-old sister was diagnosed at age 53; she underwent pacemaker implantation for persistent atrial fibrillation. She remained in class II heart failure 23 years after diagnosis, with mild left ventricular enlargement and an ejection fraction of 40%. At age 57, a brother was given a diagnosis of idiopathic left ventricular enlargement, and was confirmed to have CMD on follow-up echocardiogram 3 years later. At age 68, he had cardiomegaly and a borderline ejection fraction of 50%; he died of cancer at age 73. Their parents were first cousins who died at ages 91 and 76 years, with no apparent heart disease. The remaining 6 sibs, aged 55 to 81 years, had completely normal echocardiograms and none developed heart failure over 4 to 22 years of follow-up; similarly, CMD was excluded in the 8 children of the affected individuals, and none developed CMD in over 20 years of follow-up.
614673	Hussain et al. (2012) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with primary microcephaly apparent at birth. Each had a sloping forehead, retrognathia, severe cognitive deficits, and unintelligible speech at age 5 years. One died at age 11 years. The head circumferences ranged between -12 and -14.5 SD. No other abnormalities were noted. Farooq et al. (2016) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with MCPH8. The patients had severe learning disabilities and speech impairment, but no seizures. Their head circumferences at the age of 10 and 7 years were -14 and -12 SD, respectively.
614674	Rutanen et al. (1993) reported 2 Finnish women who had recurrent fevers up to 40 degrees Celsius associated with the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, who also had continuously elevated serum levels of TNF (191160) and IL6 (147620). The first woman developed monthly recurrent fevers, up to 39.5 degrees Celsius and lasting 1 week, at age 17 years; evaluation revealed only mild hypercortisolism. At age 18, she developed severe tremor and ataxia in association with the fever, which continued for a 2-month period. She was found to be pregnant, which was terminated due to her continued fever and neurologic symptoms; after termination, the fever and associated symptoms disappeared, but subsequently the fever and hypercortisolism recurred. Two more pregnancies were associated with fever, tremor, and ataxia, with resolution of symptoms after termination of the pregnancies. Upon recognition of an association between fever and the midluteal phase of the menstrual cycle, progesterone levels were measured and found to be normal. Three more pregnancies were associated with fever and ended in spontaneous abortions at 6 to 7 weeks' gestation. At age 28, the patient still had midluteal phase increases in temperature, but the associated symptoms were markedly milder than in the early years of the disorder. The second patient developed fever, myalgia, and lower extremity weakness after beginning use of a triphasic oral contraceptive at age 18. Evaluation after 6 weeks of continuous fever revealed no infectious focus. The oral contraceptive pill was discontinued, and the patient's symptoms improved dramatically; however, the patient was subsequently readmitted for evaluation several times due to recurrent fevers occurring at days 19 through 25 of the menstrual cycle, concomitant with the highest levels of serum progesterone. No signs of infection were detected and the only abnormal findings were mildly elevated serum cortisol and 11-deoxycorticosterol as well as 24-hour urinary excretion of cortisol. Administration of progesterone and progestins triggered fever in both patients, and treatment with antiprogesterone (RU486) prevented the fever and associated symptoms, which recurred with cessation of RU486. To prevent the endogenous progesterone surge, the first patient also underwent ovarian suppression by treatment with the GnRH (152760) antagonist nafarelin and remained afebrile. Serum levels of TNF and IL6 were consistently elevated in both patients, 4- to 6-fold and 4- to 4.5-fold, respectively, greater than the levels observed in healthy female controls. Rutanen et al. (1993) noted that fever did not appear immediately after ovulation, suggesting that a certain threshold of serum progesterone was required to trigger it. Nakamura and Hino (2005) reported a 30-year-old Japanese woman who developed recurrent high fevers (greater than 38 degrees Celsius) associated with her menstrual cycle 3 years after being treated with interferon-beta for a hepatitis C infection. The fevers occurred a few days after ovulation, and when ovarian function was suppressed by GnRH agonist (GnRHa), the symptoms disappeared. While in anovulation, the patient received estrogen followed by estrogen with progestogen, which resembles the sex hormone milieu of a normal menstrual cycle without the luteinizing hormone (LH; 152780) surge; this treatment did not induce the symptoms. When human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG; 118860) was injected on the beginning day of estrogen with progestogen following treatment with estrogen alone, the previous symptoms reappeared. However, hCG injection without estrogen priming did not induce symptoms, indicating that the LH surge after estrogen priming caused the symptoms. Measurements of inflammatory cytokines, including TNF, IL6, IL1A (147760), and IL1B (147720), showed that serum levels were highest during the menstrual period, but there were no significant changes on the day when symptoms appeared. After ending 5 months of treatment with GnRHa, the patient had normal menstrual cycles, and although symptoms still occurred, they were mild and did not require treatment. Yamasaki et al. (2011) described a 14-year-old Japanese girl who presented with a 1-year history of recurrent febrile episodes (39 to 41 degrees Celsius) associated with development of regular menstrual cycles. Recording of basal body temperatures revealed that the fevers occurred for 10 to 12 days, concomitant with the luteal phase of every ovulatory cycle, and disappeared 1 day before the onset of menses. Suppression of the ovulatory cycle with GnRHa abolished the fevers. Yamasaki et al. (2011) noted that unlike the report by Rutanen et al. (1993), in which there was persistent elevation of TNF and IL6 associated with progesterone action, serum levels of inflammatory cytokines in this patient, including TNF, IL1B, IL2 (147680), IL6, IL8 (146930), IL10 (124092), and C-reactive protein (123260), did not change during GnRHa therapy and most were within the normal range before and during GnRHa administration. Yamasaki et al. (2011) concluded that luteal-phase-dependent febrile episodes might be induced by various mechanisms. Jiang et al. (2012) studied a 33-year-old Taiwanese woman with high fevers (greater than 38 degrees Celsius) in both the pre- and postovulation periods of her menstrual cycle since menarche at 14 years of age. Evaluation for infectious processes was negative, and serologic studies for connective tissue disorders and immunoelectrophoresis were all normal. During her menstrual cycles, extremely high levels of estrogen were observed in the luteal phase, and her fevers were not associated with levels of proinflammatory factors such as IL1B or IL6. GnRHa therapy resulted in complete remission of the fevers in association with ovarian suppression, and administration of a conjugated estrogen, Premarin, on the first day of the menstrual cycle immediately increased her body temperature. However, the progesterone antagonist RU486 had no effect on her fevers; taken together, these findings suggested that estrogen might play a critical role in her fevers. Family history revealed that her father had diabetes and diabetes-associated uremia, and her older brother developed migraines at age 20 years and diabetes at age 32. Her mother and sister were healthy. Because migraine, thermoregulation, and glucose metabolism are associated with human serotonin receptor HTR1A (109760) function, Jiang et al. (2012) administered a serotonin receptor antagonist, buspiron, which resulted in successful remission of the patient's periodic fevers.
614675	Kirwan et al. (2012) reported a family in which 3 sibs, aged 11 to 14 years, had early-onset aplastic anemia or pancytopenia and their mother had myelodysplasia. All also had congenital nerve deafness. None were treated for the hematologic abnormalities. In a second family, both a mother and daughter had adult-onset myelodysplasia. Neither had deafness, but the daughter had possible labyrinthitis. Neither received treatment.
614678	Ryan et al. (2000) reported 5 patients, including 2 sibs, with pontocerebellar hypoplasia associated with anterior horn cell disease of the spinal cord. The 2 sibs died at ages 6 days and 5 months, respectively. They both had severe hypotonia, were poorly responsive, and had respiratory insufficiency. Postmortem examination showed severe cerebellar atrophy with absent granular layer, decreased number of Purkinje cells, white matter gliosis, and a paucity of axons. Skeletal muscle showed neurogenic atrophy. Spinal cord examination in 1 sib showed decreased numbers of anterior horn cells. A third unrelated child had joint contractures, hip dislocation, and foot deformities at birth. He was severely hypotonic with only flickers of voluntary movement. He was visually nonreactive with nystagmus. He died of respiratory failure at age 3 months. Postmortem examination showed muscle atrophy, hypoplastic cerebellum, and degeneration of spinal cord anterior horn cells. A fourth infant had dysmorphic facies, foot deformities, poor feeding, and respiratory insufficiency. There was psychomotor delay with visual inattention. He was hypertonic but had progressive muscle weakness and died at age 11 months. The pons and cerebellum were hypoplastic and there was loss of anterior horn cells in the spinal cord. A fifth child was similarly affected. Ryan et al. (2000) noted the similar phenotype in these patients, with hypotonia and severe weakness in the neonatal period, occasional spasticity, and abnormal brainstem signs. All had severe global developmental delay. The spinal cord changes resembled spinal muscular atrophy (SMA; 253300), but the more severe phenotype in PCH type 1 reflected additional cerebellar and cerebral involvement. Salman et al. (2003) reported 2 sibs, born of unrelated Spanish-Cuban parents, with pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1. A boy presented with nystagmus, axial hypotonia, and hypertonic lower extremities at age 3 months. He made little developmental progress and developed fatal respiratory failure due to pneumonia at age 14 months. CT scan at age 8 months showed generalized brain atrophy. His younger sister showed feeding difficulties, severe global developmental delay, and poor head control in infancy. She had increased tone in the lower extremities, brisk reflexes, nystagmus, microcephaly, and pontocerebellar hypoplasia on brain scan. Funduscopy suggested retinal dystrophy, and electroretinographic studies indicated a progressive rod/cone dystrophy. She also had an abnormal sleep breathing pattern. She died at age 40 months of respiratory failure. Postmortem examination showed anterior horn cell degeneration of the spinal cord and marked loss of Purkinje and granular cells with gliosis in the cerebellum. Skeletal muscles showed neurogenic atrophy, and sural nerve biopsy showed axonopathy. Rudnik-Schoneborn et al. (2003) described 6 patients from 4 families (3 German and 1 Norwegian) with pontocerebellar hypoplasia associated with infantile spinal muscular atrophy. The patients presented at birth or within the first 6 months of life with profound hypotonia followed by severely delayed psychomotor development and absent speech. Brain imaging showed cerebellar hypoplasia. In addition, 2 sisters also had a retrocerebellar cyst and another patient had profound pontocerebellar hypoplasia with a hypotrophic brainstem. All patients underwent testing for infantile SMA1 (253300), and homozygous absence of the SMN1 gene (600354) was excluded in all. In a review of these patients, Rudnik-Schoneborn et al. (2013) noted that all but 1 of the children died within the first years of life. One had epilepsy, 2 had infantile seizures, and 3 had nystagmus. Wan et al. (2012) reported a family of American and European origin in which 4 brothers had PCH1B. All were hypotonic at birth and showed global developmental delay, without achieving any motor milestones. Although normal in size at birth, they all showed progressive microcephaly and severe growth retardation within the first year. Other features included oculomotor apraxia, progressive muscle wasting, and distal contractures. They never learned to speak. Brain MRI showed marked cerebellar atrophy with prominent sulci and decreased volume of folia. The brainstem and cerebral cortex appeared normal, but were small. The patients were 9, 16, and 18 years at the time of the report; 1 died at age 18 years. Electromyography in 2 patients showed neurogenic changes of denervation and reinnervation consistent with axonal loss. Nerve conduction studies showed impaired motor responses and normal sensory responses. Postmortem examination of 1 patient showed severe loss of cerebellar and spinal motor neurons. Schwabova et al. (2013) reported 3 unrelated Czech children of Roma descent with PCH1B. One of the patients had previously been reported by Wan et al. (2012). All presented at birth with severe hypotonia, muscle weakness with areflexia, and sucking difficulties. Two patients had congenital contractures. The infants later showed progressive microcephaly, severe global developmental delay, weak cry, growth retardation, and visual impairment. None had spontaneous antigravity movements; 1 had tongue fasciculations. Brain imaging showed cerebellar hypoplasia, severe hypoplasia of the vermis, and mild hypoplasia of the brainstem. All patients died of respiratory insufficiency before 2 years of age. Postmortem examination of 2 patients showed short cerebellar folia with poor branching, loss of Purkinje cells and neurons in the granular layer, pontine hypoplasia, segmental loss of the inferior olivary nucleus, and loss of motor neurons in the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord. Zanni et al. (2013) reported 2 sibs, born of unrelated Bangladeshi parents, with a relatively mild form of PCH1B confirmed by genetic analysis (D132A, 606489.0001 and V80F, 606489.0006 in the EXOSC3 gene). Both patients had delayed motor development, difficulty walking, and distal amyotrophy. The older sib had severe spasticity and became wheelchair-bound in his teens; his younger sister retained ambulation with support in her teens. Both had mild to moderate intellectual disability, but the sister was able to attend school. Other features included adducted thumbs, talipes valgus, tongue atrophy, fasciculations, brisk tendon reflexes, and gaze-evoked nystagmus. Brain imaging showed cerebellar atrophy with normal brainstem. Neither patient had hypotonia or microcephaly. The report expanded the phenotypic spectrum associated with EXOSC3 mutations to include hereditary spastic paraplegia. Halevy et al. (2014) reported 2 pairs of sibs from a large consanguineous family of Arab origin with a mild form of PCH1B presenting as complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia with variable cognitive impairment. Whole-exome sequencing identified a homozygous missense mutation in the EXOSC3 gene (G191C; 606489.0007) that segregated with the disorder, but functional studies were not performed. The patients were 12 to 21 years of age at the time of the report. All showed delayed motor development with late walking and eventual deterioration of walking ability. All patients had mild cerebellar signs, including nystagmus with or without intention tremor and dysmetria, and brain imaging of all patients showed mild hypoplasia and atrophy of the lower part of the vermis with a normal pons. None had microcephaly or lower motor neuron signs, and spinal imaging was normal. Halevy et al. (2014) emphasized the mild phenotype in these patients.
614679	Panizzi et al. (2012) reported 10 patients from 6 families with primary ciliary dyskinesia. Five of the families were consanguineous and of Pakistani origin, and 1 was nonconsanguineous and of German origin. Four of the Pakistani families had previously been reported by O'Callaghan et al. (2010) and resided in the U.K. The patients had classic features of the disorder, including recurrent upper and lower respiratory infections, sinusitis, bronchiectasis, and variable dextrocardia or situs inversus. Electron microscopy showed variable defects in the inner and outer dynein arms of cilia that differed even with a family. Videomicroscopy showed either complete cilia paralysis, reduced beat amplitude, or loss of beat coordination.
614691	Aldahmesh et al. (2012) reported a sister and 2 brothers from a consanguineous Saudi family who were born with congenital cataract but had otherwise normal ophthalmologic and systemic examinations. Specifically, cardiac evaluation including electrocardiography and echocardiography showed no evidence of structural or functional impairment, they had normal muscle power clinically and lacked any history of exercise intolerance, and lactic acid was normal in all 3 patients.
614699	Thiel et al. (2012) reported a 28-year-old man who presented with persistent myalgias, fever, sore throat, respiratory tract infections, and chronic diarrhea associated with Haemophilus influenza infection. He had a history of recurrent respiratory infections in childhood that resolved after tonsillectomy. Clinical examination as an adult showed splenomegaly. Laboratory studies showed hypogammaglobulinemia affecting mainly IgG; IgA values were slightly reduced and IgM levels were low-normal. Antibodies against recall antigens, such as measles, mumps, and varicella, were normal, and he had antibodies against EBV. The patient was diagnosed with an incipient CVID syndrome. Flow cytometric analysis showed complete absence of CD21 antigen in the patient's B cells. The B cells showed a mature antigen phenotype, but there was a reduction in class-switched memory B cells. Patient B cells showed reduced binding to a C3d (see 120700)-containing immune complex and to EBV compared to control cells, and also showed no costimulatory activity via the B-cell receptor complex. Patient cells showed normal proliferative response and production of immunoglobulin on stimulation with anti-IgM and anti-CD40 (109535), and the patient mounted a normal antibody response to protein vaccination, although his response to pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccination was somewhat impaired.
614700	Lopez-Herrera et al. (2012) reported 5 patients from 4 unrelated consanguineous families with early-childhood onset of humoral immune deficiency and autoimmunity. In an Arabian family, 2 sibs presented in infancy with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) followed by recurrent respiratory infections or otitis media. They both developed chronic lung disease and bronchiectasis. One had early-onset asthma and steroid-responsive monoarthritis, whereas the other developed a cerebral mass suggestive of a granuloma. Both showed poor overall growth. Laboratory studies showed low immunoglobulin levels, consistent with a diagnosis of CVID. A Sicilian boy presented with recurrent warts and perineal molluscum contagiosum at age 12 years. He later developed recurrent severe respiratory infections with interstitial pneumonitis and bronchiectasis, ITP, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, atrophic gastritis due to autoantibodies against intrinsic factor, a submaxillary abscess, and colitis. Laboratory studies showed low IgG and complete IgA deficiency with normal neutrophil count. Hilar and mediastinal lymph node biopsies showed lymphoid follicular hyperplasia with the absence of the follicular mantle zone. He also developed a brain tumor of the right temporal lobe which was shown to be a granulomatous infiltration with T cells, plasma cells, and macrophages, but few B cells. An Iranian boy presented at age 2 years with recurrent respiratory infections, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and ITP. He developed finger clubbing due to chronic lung disease, hepatosplenomegaly, and failure to thrive. During 10 years' follow-up, he developed Crohn disease, cor pulmonale with right heart failure, and recurrent conjunctivitis. The fifth patient was an Iranian women who died at age 19 years after respiratory failure. She also had allergic dermatitis, recurrent diarrhea, recurrent upper respiratory infections, hypothyroidism, and myasthenia gravis. All homozygous individuals with LRBA deficiency showed reduced counts of switched-memory B cells, consistent with CVID. Two patients lacked marginal-zone-like B cells, and 1 had reduced counts of total B cells. Two patients had low natural killer (NK) cells, and 1 had low T-cell levels. Alangari et al. (2012) reported 5 patients from 2 branches of a consanguineous Saudi family with an inherited disorder of immune dysregulation. One branch of the family contained 3 sisters ranging in age from 15 to 22 years. Two of the sisters presented in the first years of life with chronic nonbloody diarrhea, whereas the third presented with recurrent respiratory infections from age 4 years and developed diarrhea at age 18 years. Large-bowel biopsies of 2 patients showed mucosal inflammation and lymphocytic infiltration, and duodenal biopsy of 1 showed villous atrophy. One sister developed autoimmune thrombocytopenia and autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Two sisters had no history of recurrent infections. Immunologic workup showed low serum IgA and IgG with normal numbers of T and NK cells but markedly decreased T-cell proliferative responses. Two of the sisters had decreased numbers of B cells. The findings were consistent with a diagnosis of combined immunodeficiency. Two sibs from the other branch of the family presented with chronic diarrhea in childhood. Duodenal biopsies showed villous blunting and lymphocytic infiltration. One patient developed pancytopenia that responded to intravenous Ig and steroids; he also had Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-induced lymphoproliferative disease. Neither of these sibs had a history of recurrent infections, and immunologic workup showed normal Ig levels, normal B, T, and NK cells, normal T-cell proliferative responses, and normal antibody production in response to vaccination. However, Alangari et al. (2012) noted that the phenotype in these patients was consistent with immune dysregulation, and that the patients could develop more apparent immunologic abnormalities with age. The variability in the phenotype within this family was ascribed to other genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors. Burns et al. (2012) reported a Pakistani girl, born of consanguineous parents, who presented at age 4 years with generalized lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and chronic diarrhea associated with autoimmune enteropathy. Initial immunologic workup showed increased serum IgG and low numbers of NK cells; T-cell number and function were normal. She showed growth defects and additional autoimmune features, and was treated with steroids and rituximab. Five years later, she developed severe recurrent infections and had new onset of an antibody deficiency with variable decreases in B cells. Exome sequencing identified a large homozygous deletion in the LRBA gene. Burns et al. (2012) noted that this disorder can present as an autoimmune syndrome with later development of a primary immunodeficiency. Charbonnier et al. (2015) reported a boy, born of consanguineous Saudi parents, who presented in infancy with autoimmune enteropathy, type 1 diabetes mellitus, autoimmune hypothyroidism, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and recurrent infections. Immunologic workup showed reduced T-cell proliferative responses, normal B-cell numbers, increased immunoglobulin levels, and increased autoantibodies. The phenotype was reminiscent of X-linked immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy (IPEX; 304790), but the patient did not carry mutations in the FOXP3 gene (300292). Whole-exome sequencing identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the LRBA gene (606453.0006). Charbonnier et al. (2015) also reported 2 sibs from a consanguineous Lebanese family who had childhood onset of recurrent infections, as well as variable features of immune dysregulation, including generalized lymphadenopathy, fibrosing pneumonitis with granulomas, hepatosplenomegaly, and pancytopenia. Laboratory investigations of these 3 patients and of the 3 sisters reported by Alangari et al. (2012) showed severe decreases in the number of CD4+ Treg cells, as well as decreases in several Treg cell markers, such as FOXP3, IL2RA (147730), and CTLA4 (123890). In vitro studies showed that patient Treg cells had impaired suppression of T-cell proliferation, with a skewing in favor of memory T cells and intense autoantibody production, as well as marked expansion of T follicular helper (T-FH) cells and contraction of T follicular regulatory (T-FR) cells. Patient Treg cells showed increased apoptosis and metabolic dysfunction. Lo et al. (2015) identified 9 patients with LRBA deficiency. Most patients were diagnosed in early childhood with CVID, and all patients experienced substantial inflammatory and/or autoimmune complications. LRBA deficiency was associated with type 1 diabetes mellitus in 3 patients, Burkitt lymphoma in 1, and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in 1. Three patients experienced severe interstitial lung disease consisting of dense predominantly T-cell interstitial infiltrates that was refractory to multiple medications and led to progressive impairment of lung function. All patients had undergone corticosteroid therapy, and several had undergone various other immunosuppressive therapies prior to abatacept. Two underwent splenectomy.
614701	Deardorff et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated patients, a boy and a girl, with a phenotype suggestive of Cornelia de Lange syndrome. Both had microcephaly and a characteristic facial appearance, with thick, bushy, arched eyebrows, synophrys, long or prominent eyelashes, broad nasal bridge, smooth philtrum, and thin upper lip. The boy had ptosis and an upturned nasal tip, whereas the girl had upslanted palpebral fissures and a short nose. The boy had a number of additional congenital anomalies, including poor dental enamel, submucosal cleft palate, stapes fixation, thin fingers, left radioulnar synostosis, delayed skeletal age, vertebral clefting, pectus carinatum, short femoral neck, tetralogy of Fallot, intestinal malrotation, and gastroesophageal reflux. He also had severe cognitive delay and attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder. The girl had short fingers, fifth finger clinodactyly, small prominent first toe, long fourth metacarpal, cutis marmorata, and mild neurodevelopmental defects. Kruszka et al. (2019) reported 3 unrelated patients (patients 12-14) with CDLS4 ascertained from a larger cohort of patients with holoprosencephaly (HPE) who underwent exome sequencing. The patients had classic features of CDLS, including developmental delay, microcephaly, brachycephaly, hypo- or hypertelorism, synophrys, long philtrum, upturned or short nose, low-set ears, thin vermilion border, and cleft palate. One patient had seizures and another had small hands, fifth finger clinodactyly, and gastroesophageal reflux. Brain imaging showed variable midline brain defects, including HPE, MIHV (middle interhemispheric variant of HPE), and septooptic dysplasia. The father of one of the patients, who also carried the mutation, had synophrys and a submucosal cleft palate; brain imaging of the father was not reported. Kruszka et al. (2019) noted that the incidence of midline brain defects in patients with CDLS may be higher than originally thought, since not all patients undergo brain imaging. Goel and Parasivam (2020) described a female fetus who was found to have mild unilateral ventriculomegaly on prenatal ultrasound and on prenatal MRI at 24 weeks' gestation. At 32 weeks' gestation, a repeat MRI found lobar holoprosencephaly with fusion of the occipital horns of the lateral ventricles across the midline and an absent posterior septum. After pregnancy termination at 34 weeks' gestation, the infant was found to have hypertelorism, flat face, broad nasal bridge, long and flat philtrum, and thin lips. Boyle et al. (2017) reported a 26-year-old woman with microcephaly, learning disabilities, and facial features of CDLS including synophrys, high-arched and thick eyebrows, long philtrum, and anteverted nares. Her mother had similar but milder features. Two maternal aunts (patients III:1 and III:2) had low anterior and posterior hairlines, short and broad necks, bilateral limited elbow extension, learning disabilities, and hearing loss. Patient III:2 also had a cleft palate and mild structural heart disease. Patient III:1 was diagnosed with osteoporosis at 25 years of age. None of the patients had behavioral symptoms of CDLS. Minor et al. (2014) reported 3 patients, including a mother and son, with CDLS4. Patient 1 was a boy with a history of developmental delay, severe hypospadias, inguinal hernia, dysmorphic features, congenital nystagmus, strabismus, and unilateral ptosis. At age 3 years he was able to speak 4- or 5-word phrases and had autistic features. On examination, he had scaphocephaly, coarse facial features, frontal bossing, mild synophrys, unilateral ptosis, and micrognathia. His affected 42-year-old mother had a history of myopia, obsessive-compulsive tendencies, anxiety, and depression. Facial features included a long face, high nasal bridge, tooth crowding, and thick eyebrows. Patient 2 was a boy with developmental delay, dysmorphic facial features, hirsutism, and hand anomalies. He received special education for reading disabilities and attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). On physical examination at age 12 years, he had microcephaly, brachycephaly, thick bushy eyebrows with synophrys, a bilateral transverse palmar crease, syndactyly of the second and third fingers, and fifth finger clinodactyly. Dorval et al. (2020) reported a boy with CDLS4 who had a history of progressive microcephaly. Cognitive testing at age 5 years showed a heterogeneous intellectual profile with verbal IQ in the low average range for age, performance IQ in the average range, and an extremely low processing speed. Gudmundsson et al. (2019) reported a patient with CDLS4 who had left-sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia, which was surgically repaired 2 days after birth. At 15 months of age he had growth delay and microcephaly, prominent digital finger pads, and a single transverse palmar crease. Krab et al. (2020) performed a literature review, database search, and review of identified but unreported patients with RAD21 mutations and CDLS4. Clinical features were reported in 29 patients from 22 families, with an age range of 0 to 61 years and a median age of 9 years. About half of these patients had congenital anomalies, including cleft palate and cardiac anomalies. Major limb defects were not seen, and hands and feet were not small. Most children were able to attend regular education or received education for children with mild cognitive disabilities. Behavioral problems, including anxiety, ADHD, and autism spectrum disorder, were seen in most patients. There was no observed correlation between the severity of cognitive impairment and the presence of microcephaly.
614702	Ghezzi et al. (2012) reported 2 Italian sibs, born of unrelated parents, with fatal infantile hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Both patients showed reduced fetal growth. The first presented soon after birth with lactic acidosis and severe hypoglycemia. Electroencephalogram (EEG) and cerebral, hepatic, and splenic echography were normal. Interventricular septum hypertrophy of the heart was detected on the fifteenth day of life, and he died of sudden bradycardia on day 19. Skin fibroblasts showed a reduction of mitochondrial complex III (60% of control) and complex IV (56%) of control. The patient's younger sister had severe metabolic acidosis at birth with increased blood lactate. Treatment with biotin, coenzyme Q10, thiamine, and dichloroacetate (DCA) resulted in stabilization. She became tachycardic on day 7, but heart ultrasound did not show abnormalities until day 38, when hypertrophy of the septum and left ventricular wall were seen. She died of sudden bradycardia on day 40. Autopsy showed cardiomegaly, pleural effusion, and ascites. Muscle tissue showed decreased complex I and complex IV activity (both 27% of control), whereas fibroblasts showed only decreased complex I activity. An unrelated boy from northeastern Italy had a similar disorder with a better outcome. At age 1 month, he presented with poor feeding, hyperpnea, weakness, and lack of ocular fixation. Physical examination showed hepatomegaly, lactic acidosis, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with reduced left ventricular function. Muscle tissues showed reduced activities of complex I (12% of control) and complex IV (30%). Treatment with DCA resulted in marked improvement of both metabolic acidosis and cardiomyopathy. After 9 months of DCA therapy, a cardiac ultrasound examination showed a normal-sized heart, with normal left ventricular wall thickness and function, and low blood lactate. He showed good growth and normal neurologic development in childhood, and DCA was stopped at age 12 years. Muscle biopsy at 17 years showed severe reduction of complex I (7%) and complex IV (35%). Cardiac evaluation at age 19 years showed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with an ejection fraction of 60% and sinus bradycardia. Neurologic examination was normal except for a small reduction of fine movements and optic atrophy. Baruffini et al. (2013) reported 5 patients from 3 unrelated families with COXPD10 manifest as infantile cardiomyopathy and lactic acidosis. Three patients presented at birth or in the first days of life with poor feeding, hypotonia, and failure to thrive, whereas 2 sibs presented in the first months of life with cardiomyopathy. One patient had Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (194200). The disease course was highly variable: 2 sibs died at ages 3 and 12 months, whereas 2 other sibs and an unrelated girl were alive in their teens with stable cardiac disease. The 3 patients who survived were treated aggressively with dichloroacetate (DCA) to control severe lactic acidosis. The 3 patients who survived developed psychomotor delay and other variable neurologic features, such as poor speech, dystonia, spasticity, and seizures. Brain MRI of 2 patients showed abnormal hyperintensities in deep brain structures. Patient-derived muscle samples and fibroblasts showed variable decreases of complex I and IV as well as overall defects in mitochondrial respiration. O'Byrne et al. (2018) identified and reviewed 35 cases of COXPD10 through international collaboration. The most common features at presentation were lactic acidosis, present in 21 (62%) of 34 cases, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, present in 15 (44%) of 34 cases. Eventually lactic acidosis developed in all cases, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was described in 27 (79%) of 34 patients with this disease. Global developmental delay and/or intellectual disability were present in 28 of 29 (97%), feeding difficulties in 17 (49%) of 35, failure to thrive in 12 (34%) of 35, seizures in 12 (34%) of 35, optic atrophy in 11 (52%) of 21 cases. Ataxia was present in 7 (21%) of 34. The average age at presentation was 10.2 months (range, day 1 to 8.0 years).
614706	Smith et al. (2012) reported 2 Italian sibs with young-adult onset of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Their healthy parents, who were in their fifties, came from nearby villages in Lombardy, Italy, and were demonstrated to be distantly related. The proband was a 28-year-old man who presented with rapidly progressive visual failure at age 22, followed by major convulsions at age 25 and myoclonic seizures at age 26. He had mild cerebellar ataxia, early cognitive deterioration, and retinal dystrophy. Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed generalized polyspike wave discharges, electroretinogram showed severe attenuation of both rod and cone responses, and MRI showed cerebellar atrophy. Electron microscopic examination of a skin biopsy demonstrated numerous fingerprint profiles in membrane-bound structures in eccrine secretory cells and in endothelium, consistent with CLN. The proband's 26-year-old sister developed recurrent seizures at age 23 years, sometimes preceded by visual distortions, and she later had visual deterioration. Clinical examination showed cerebellar ataxia and retinal dystrophy. EEG results showed polyspike wave discharges with a posterior emphasis, and MRI indicated cerebellar atrophy. Canafoglia et al. (2014) reported follow-up of the Italian sibs reported by Smith et al. (2012). Both showed increasing visual impairment and developed retinal changes. Both also had palinopsia associated with polyphasic visual evoked potential (VEP) waveforms, suggesting hyperexcitability of the occipital cortex. Detailed ophthalmologic studies in the brother showed retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy and stippling, thinning of the retina, and optic nerve pallor. VEPs showed depressed cortical components and virtually absent electroretinographic responses in both patients. Brain imaging in both sibs showed progressive cerebellar atrophy. Global cognition in both sibs was normal with borderline executive functions; both were able to work despite severe visual impairment. Plasma and tissue levels of GRN were undetectable. Faber et al. (2017) reported 25-year-old woman, born of possibly related Brazilian parents, who presented with a 4-year history of progressive gait impairment and urinary incontinence. She also developed mood lability, delusional thoughts, and photosensitive seizures. Physical exam showed high-arched feet, appendicular ataxia, lower limb spasticity, hyperreflexia, and extensor plantar responses, suggesting a form of complicated spastic paraplegia. Her gait was both spastic and wide-based. Brain MRI showed global and severe cerebellar atrophy. EEG showed slow wave background activity and epileptiform discharges predominating in posterior regions during photostimulation. Her executive function and cognition continued to decline, and walking was possible only with support. Ophthalmologic examination was not possible due to poor cooperation. Her parents, who were in their fifties, were asymptomatic. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous frameshift mutation in the GRN gene. Familial segregation studies could not be performed and functional studies of the variant and studies of patient cells were not performed. Kamate et al. (2019) reported a 14-year-old girl, born of consanguineous Indian parents, who presented with a 1-year history of seizures. There were no visual disturbances or decline in school performance. Physical examination showed a wide-based gait and borderline intelligence. EEG showed generalized epileptiform discharges, and brain imaging showed diffuse cerebellar atrophy and hypoplasia. She had an elder sister with progressive seizures and dementia from 8 years of age and cerebellar atrophy on brain imaging, who had died at age 16 years. Huin et al. (2020) reported 3 patients from 2 unrelated families with CLN11. Two sisters, born of possibly consanguineous Portuguese parents (family AAR-427), presented with seizures between 12 and 15 years of age. They soon developed progressive visual loss associated with retinitis pigmentosa and bilateral cataracts, as well as behavioral abnormalities, including irritability and impulsiveness, and cognitive deficits affecting executive function. Additional features included a cerebellar gait disorder with dysarthria, saccadic pursuit, nystagmus, and dysphagia, myoclonus, and visual hallucinations. Brain imaging showed progressive cerebellar atrophy. The proband died at age 27 from food inhalation during an epileptic seizure. At age 36, the sister was blind with dysarthria and dysphagia and needed a wheelchair. Peripheral lymphocytes contained vacuolar inclusions, and plasma progranulin levels were undetectable. Neuropathologic examination of the proband showed cerebellar atrophy, ballooned neurons, neuronal loss, and diffuse cytoplasmic expression of TDP43 (605078). Ultrastructural analysis of temporal cortex neurons showed numerous lysosomal deposits with curvilinear-like profiles and few fingerprint profiles, suggesting lysosomal dysfunction. The parents were asymptomatic at 57 and 61 years of age, and had low levels of plasma progranulin. An unrelated girl, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents (family NCL-001), presented with seizures at 7 years of age, followed by by progressive cerebellar ataxia with cerebellar atrophy on MRI, cognitive deterioration, and visual loss. Skin biopsy showed vesicles filled with curvilinear membrane formations. Plasma progranulin was undetectable. The parents were unaffected at 46 and 47 years of age. Neuray et al. (2021) reported 6 patients with CLN11 from 5 unrelated families, 4 of which were consanguineous (Pakistani, Italian, Kurdish, and Brazilian). The patients, who ranged from 10 to 40 years of age, had symptom onset between 5 and 15 years of age. Features included seizures (usually difficult to treat), progressive visual loss (leading to blindness in some cases), progressive ataxia (sometimes with loss of ambulation), and progressive cognitive decline of executive and memory functions, resulting in poor school performance. EEG showed generalized spikes as well as occipital spikes elicited by photostimulation. Brain imaging showed cerebellar atrophy. More variable features included nystagmus, retinitis pigmentosa, dysphagia, dysarthria, dysmetria, and tremor. Progranulin levels were undetectable in the 1 patient who was tested. All carrier parents, who ranged from 36 to 72 years of age, were healthy and unaffected, although the authors noted some may have been too young to manifest symptoms.
614707	Megarbane et al. (2000) reported a large inbred Lebanese family with 4 patients, including 3 males and 1 female, with severe features of Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome. The proband showed normal early childhood development until about age 2.5 years, when he developed progressively abnormal hearing and walking. Physical examination at age 8 years showed profound deafness with absent brainstem auditory-evoked potentials, tongue fasciculations, bulbar dysfunction, scoliosis, and axial and limb hypotonia with little spontaneous movements. He had severe neck weakness with an inability to hold up his head, proximal and distal limb weakness and atrophy, and claw hands. Deep tendon reflexes and plantar responses were absent. Intelligence appeared to be normal. He died of respiratory failure at age 11 years. His younger brother was similarly affected, and also had facial paresis, inability to close the eyes tightly, absent pupillary reflexes, and poor gag reflex, which indicated multiple cranial nerve abnormalities. EMG was neurogenic with fibrillation activity. He died suddenly at age 7 years. The boys' sister was reportedly affected, but died at age 4 years. A male first cousin had slightly less severe muscle weakness and slightly later onset at age 3.5 years, but also showed deafness and diffuse muscle weakness and atrophy. Johnson et al. (2012) reported an 11-year-old Scottish girl with BVVLS2. She presented with ataxic gait at age 18 months. At age 6 years, she showed weakness of the fingers, which rapidly progressed to severe upper limb weakness over the course of a few weeks. She also developed bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. By 7 years of age, she was wheelchair-bound due to axial hypotonia and weakness, but could walk with support as her lower limbs retained strength. Other features included optic atrophy, sleep hypoventilation, and severe axonal sensorimotor neuropathy. Metabolic testing showed evidence of carnitine deficiency and a urinary organic acid profile suggestive of MADD (231680). Treatment with high-dose riboflavin resulted in the normalization of her acylcarnitine and urinary organic acid profiles. She also showed quantitative improvements in her pulmonary function, brainstem auditory evoked potentials, and visual evoked potentials, and some improvement in upper limb strength. Haack et al. (2012) reported a girl with BVVLS2. After normal psychomotor development, she presented at age 3 years with impaired hearing, clumsiness, impaired walking due to ataxia, and vertical nystagmus. She also developed progressive optic atrophy with visual impairment and aggressive behavior. Neurologic studies showed absent reflexes in the lower extremities and an axonal sensory neuropathy. She was confined to a wheelchair from the age of 5 years. At age 5.5 years, she showed right-sided facial nerve palsy and tongue wasting with fasciculations. Laboratory analysis showed increased levels of several acylcarnitine and hydroxy-acylcarnitine species; however, plasma riboflavin was normal. Treatment with oral riboflavin supplementation resulted in improvement in fine motor skills and assisted gait, as well as normalization of laboratory findings. Ciccolella et al. (2013) reported a boy with severe, early-onset BVVLS2. He had normal early psychomotor development and began to walk at age 12 months. At age 2 years, he presented with progressive dysphonia and exercise intolerance with dyspnea and cyanosis. He later developed sensorineural hearing loss, decreased visual acuity, shoulder and axial muscle weakness, kyphosis, wasting and weakness of the hand muscles, and walking difficulties with foot drop. The disorder was rapidly progressive; at age 3 years, he was hospitalized for acute respiratory failure and died. Foley et al. (2014) reported 18 patients from 13 families with BVVLS2 confirmed by genetic analysis. One of the patients had previously been reported by Johnson et al. (2012). The most common presenting symptom was an ataxic gait, reported in 9 (50%) of 18 patients, secondary to a progressive sensory neuropathy. Symptom onset occurred in childhood, but varied between ages 7 months (nystagmus) and 8 years (ataxic gait). Most (93%) patients had optic atrophy, and all had sensorineural hearing loss. Other features included tongue fasciculations, respiratory distress, rapidly progressive upper limb weakness, weakness of the neck muscles, and areflexia. All had normal cognition despite significant visual and hearing impairment. Ten (59%) of 17 patients tested had abnormal acylcarnitine profiles. Neurophysiologic studies were consistent with an axonal sensorimotor neuropathy, and sural nerve biopsy showed loss of large diameter myelinated axons without regenerative features. Gorcenco et al. (2019) reported a 35-year-old Swedish man with BVVLS2 who had sensory ataxia, severe hearing and vision loss, polyneuropathy with proprioception difficulties, dysarthria, and decreased deep tendon reflexes. He had normal development until age 3 years when he developed hearing loss. Progressive vision loss with bilateral optic atrophy began at age 4 years. His balance and gate abnormalities presented in childhood and progressed. Neurography studies showed reduced amplitude in sensory fibers. Guissart et al. (2016) reported 4 patients from 2 unrelated consanguineous families with a similar early-onset neurologic disorder. Family A was a consanguineous Arab-Israeli family in which an uncle and niece had onset of ataxia at age 3 years, followed by hearing impairment and visual decline due to optic atrophy. The uncle became wheelchair-bound at age 25 years and was almost deaf by age 27. The niece had sensory neuropathy and mild fiber disproportion on muscle biopsy. Family A had previously been reported by Bomont et al. (2000) as having 'spinocerebellar ataxia with blindness and deafness' (SCABD) (Koenig, 2001). The disorder in family A was erroneously linked to chromosome 6p21 at that time. Upon reanalysis, Guissart et al. (2016) found that the patients had a homozygous missense mutation in the SLC52A2 gene (G306R; 607882.0001), indicating linkage to chromosome 8q24. Family B was a consanguineous Turkish family in which 2 sisters, 13 and 9 years of age, had ataxia, sensorineural deafness, and visual decline beginning at 10 and 2 years, respectively. Physical examination showed ataxic gait, distal muscle weakness, and optic atrophy. The younger sister had additional features, including atrophy of the intrinsic hand and foot muscles, contractures of distal joints, areflexia, intention tremor, and dysarthria. Electrophysiologic studies in both sisters in family B showed a mild demyelinating motor neuropathy with axonal involvement. They also had sensory deficits with no sural nerve activity. Brain MRI in the younger sister at age 9 showed mild atrophy of the anterior superior cerebellar vermis.
614714	Luan et al. (2011) reported a 4-generation Chinese family from the Anhui province with disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis. The average age at onset was 28 years, but the earliest onset was at age 16. The skin lesions were small, conically shaped papules, 1 to 3 mm in diameter, that enlarged centrifugally over months or years, leaving a central atrophic area and a well-defined irregular keratotic rim. Most lesions were on the extremities, especially distally on the extensor and lateral surfaces. The face, neck, and trunk were also affected, but the palms, soles, and oral mucosal surfaces were spared. The lesions become more prominent with sunlight exposure. There was intrafamilial variation in the number of lesions and severity of disease. The proband, who had DSAP, also developed linear atrophic plaques along the left side of her leg after left foot trauma as a teen. Histologic specimens of both DSAP and the linear lesions from the proband showed an invagination of the epidermis containing a column of parakeratotic cells overlying an absent granular layer. There was no malignant transformation in the linear lesion. None of the other affected family members had linear lesions.
614723	Mutant forms of adenine phosphoribosyltransferase were described by Kelley et al. (1968) and by Henderson et al. (1969) who found the inheritance to be autosomal. The heat-stable enzyme allele has a frequency of about 15% and the heat-labile enzyme allele a frequency of about 85%. Kelley et al. (1968) found apparent heterozygosity in 4 persons in 3 generations of a family. However, the level of enzyme activity in heterozygotes ranged from 21 to 37%, not 50%. Fox et al. (1973) described a family with partial deficiency of red cell APRT, consistent with a heterozygous state, although enzyme activity was less than 50%. The partial deficiency of erythrocyte APRT was not associated with any detectable abnormality in purine metabolism. The proband had a normal concentration of PRPP and ATP in erythrocytes, a normal availability of purine nucleotides, a normal rate of purine biosynthesis de novo, a normal excretion of uric acid, and a normal response to adenine administration. Although the proband had both hyperuricemia and reduced erythrocyte APRT activity, these 2 traits segregated independently in the family. Delbarre et al. (1974) found deficiency of APRT in persons with gout but recognized that purine overproduction was not necessarily caused by the APRT deficiency. Emmerson et al. (1975) described a family with autosomal inheritance of APRT deficiency. The proband was a 24-year-old woman who had suffered from recurrent gouty arthritis since the age of 11 years. She also demonstrated considerable, although asymptomatic, renal impairment with a creatinine clearance of one-third normal. Eleven other asymptomatic members of the family also demonstrated a similar reduction in APRT activity in erythrocyte lysates. The partially purified APRT enzyme in the proband showed no difference in Michaelis constants, heat stability, or electrophoresis. Debray et al. (1976) observed a child with urolithiasis and complete deficiency of APRT. Both parents had partial deficiency. Van Acker et al. (1977) described brothers with complete deficiency of APRT. They were detected because one of them had from birth excreted gravel consisting of stones of 2,8-dihydroxyadenine in urine. Neither showed hyperuricemia or gout. Treatment with allopurinol and a low purine diet stopped stone formation. The authors concluded that homozygotes can be detected by raised urinary adenine levels and absence of detectable red cell APRT. Barratt et al. (1979) reported a child, born of consanguineous Arab parents, who had 2,8-dihydroxyadenine stones resulting from a complete lack of APRT. Gault et al. (1981) described 2,8-dihydroxyadenine urolithiasis in a white woman who lived in Newfoundland and first developed symptoms of urolithiasis at the age of 42. The authors noted that the use of infrared or x-ray diffraction analysis of calculi positive for uric acid with standard wet chemical tests can make the diagnosis. Affected adults may first present with renal failure. Renal biopsy shows changes similar to those of uric acid nephropathy. Kishi et al. (1984) found only 10 reported cases of complete deficiency of APRT, beginning with the case of Cartier et al. (1974). Kishi et al. (1984) reported 3 cases in 2 families. Although APRT deficiency occurred in mononuclear cells and polymorphonuclear leukocytes as well as in red cells, no abnormality of immunologic or phagocytic function was detected. The sole clinical manifestation was urinary calculi composed of 2,8-DHA. Manyak et al. (1987) found DHA-urolithiasis in a 50-year-old white woman who was homozygous for APRT deficiency. Glicklich et al. (1988) reported the second case of homozygous APRT deficiency from the United States. The disorder was recognized 23 years after the patient, a black woman from Bermuda, had her initial episode of renal colic, and after 2,8-dihydroxyadenine stones had recurred after renal transplant.Kamatani et al. (1987) examined samples from 19 Japanese families with DHA-urolithiasis. In 15 (79%) of the 19 families, the patients had only partial APRT deficiency, which contrasted with complete deficiency reported in all non-Japanese patients. All Japanese patients with DHA-urolithiasis were homozygotes regardless of whether the deficiency was complete or partial. However, family studies revealed 4 asymptomatic homozygous family members. The segregation pattern was consistent with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. Kamatani et al. (1987) estimated that about 1% of the Japanese population are carriers.
614727	Foulquier et al. (2012) reported 5 patients from 4 families with CDG2K. The first family contained 2 affected sibs, born of Georgian Jewish parents. The 19-year-old boy had psychomotor retardation and severe growth retardation. He also had midface hypoplasia, muscle weakness, fat excess, joint laxity, and hepatosplenomegaly with increased serum transaminases. Laboratory studies showed increased creatine kinase and partial growth hormone deficiency. Skeletal anomalies included osteoporosis and epiphyseal, metaphyseal, and diaphyseal dysplasia. Brain MRI showed white matter abnormalities and hypoplasia of the pituitary gland. His sister, who had similar clinical features, also had recurrent, unexplained fever episodes; she died at 14 months of age from an acute infectious shock. Another Georgian Jewish child with similar features, including unexplained fever, also had transient epilepsy, dwarfism, and unexplained restrictive lung pathology. A Turkish boy had delayed psychomotor development and mild rhizomelia, but no significant skeletal anomalies. An American girl had short stature, facial dysmorphism, wrinkled skin, abnormal fat distribution, and dysplastic toenails. She had amelogenesis imperfecta and multiple skeletal abnormalities, including osteoporosis, anterior beaking of vertebrae, dysplastic vertebrae and ribs, dysplastic fourth metacarpals and metatarsals, hypoplasia of femoral heads, and kyphoscoliosis. Serum transferrin analysis of the patients showed a CDG type II pattern, and patient cells showed an N-glycosylation defect and abnormal Golgi morphology. Zeevaert et al. (2013) provided a detailed clinical summary of the 3 Georgian Ashkenazi Jewish patients with CDG2K reported by Foulquier et al. (2012). Additional dysmorphic features noted in the Georgian Jewish boy included dense hair, long and dense eyelashes, delayed dentition, and hoarse voice. He also had a waddling gait and muscular hypotrophy. Laboratory abnormalities included a moderate decrease in certain clotting factors and low levels of certain pubertal hormones at age 16. His younger sister also had some dysmorphic features, including ptosis, strabismus, low-set ears, long philtrum, high-arched palate, short and broad neck, broad thorax, sacral dimple, and absent second toenails. The unrelated boy had macrocephaly, tongue protrusion, downslanting palpebral fissures, flat nose, and posteriorly rotated ears. All 3 patients had radiologic evidence of skeletal dysplasia, which Zeevaert et al. (2013) noted was a distinctive feature in this form of CDG.
614728	Sir et al. (2011) ascertained a consanguineous Pakistani family in which 3 female cousins were born with microcephaly, with head circumferences of -4 SD to -6 SD. All had speech delay, but learned to speak by 3 years of age; by age 5 years there was clear evidence of cognitive delay, but there was no motor delay. At the time of examination they were 18 years, 16 years, and 7.5 years of age, and all had head circumferences of 9 to 15 cm below the 3rd centile. All 3 had short stature, with heights that ranged from -2 SD to -4 SD. There was no history of seizures, and there were no other malformations.
614732	Vilain et al. (1999) reported 3 boys with adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC; see 300200) and additional findings representing a novel syndrome that they designated IMAGE: intrauterine growth retardation, metaphyseal dysplasia, AHC, and genital anomalies. The patients presented shortly after birth with growth retardation and severe adrenal insufficiency, and each had mild dysmorphic features, bilateral cryptorchidism, a small penis, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Skeletal surveys revealed metaphyseal dysplasia in all 3 patients and epiphyseal dysplasia in 2. The patients had documented or suspected hypercalciuria and/or hypercalcemia, resulting in nephrocalcinosis in one and in prenatal liver and spleen calcifications in another. AHC presents most often either as an isolated abnormality, caused by mutations in the DAX1 gene (NR0B1; 300473), or as part of an Xp21 contiguous gene syndrome caused by a deletion of the Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD; 300377), glycerol kinase (GK; 300474), and DAX1 genes. All 3 patients with the IMAGE association had normal creatine kinase levels and no evidence of GK deficiency (307030). Sequence analysis revealed no mutation in the DAX1- or steroidogenic factor-1 (SF1; 184757)-coding sequences and no deletion of DAX1. Bergada et al. (2005) studied 4 children with IMAGE association (3 males, 1 female) from a large 5-generation pedigree. Ten additional members who died during the neonatal period who were born with intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) and/or hyperpigmentation were presumed to have been affected as well. All patients in this series were diagnosed during the newborn period. Adrenal insufficiency was variable within patients. All had severe IUGR and marked postnatal growth failure. Sequence analysis from 2 patients revealed no mutation in DAX1. Analysis of the pedigree revealed a pattern consistent with inheritance via the maternal line. Hence, the pattern of inheritance in this family of this unusual disorder might be explained in terms of the genomic imprinting hypothesis, with expression through maternal transmission involving an autosomal gene. Balasubramanian et al. (2010) reported a 4-year-old boy who had typical features of IMAGE syndrome as well as bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, a feature not previously reported in this syndrome. The authors reviewed previously reported cases, noting that epiphyseal dysplasia had consistently been reported as a feature; they suggested that it should be considered as a diagnostic feature in the absence of clear evidence of metaphyseal dysplasia because the metaphyseal changes may be variable and confined to the short tubular bones or relatively mild.
614736	Meimaridou et al. (2012) studied patients from 15 families with glucocorticoid deficiency, all of whom were negative for mutation in genes known to cause GCCD. The patients, who were diagnosed between 6 months and 40 months of age, presented with hyperpigmentation, high ACTH levels, and low cortisol levels, but with normal renin and aldosterone levels. All patients in whom an ACTH stimulation test was performed failed to mount a suitable response. Yamaguchi et al. (2013) studied a Japanese boy who presented at 19 months of age with generalized skin pigmentation and weakness, and was found to be hyponatremic with low cortisol, markedly elevated ACTH, low-normal aldosterone, and elevated plasma renin activity. Adrenal glands were not visualized on abdominal CT scan. He was diagnosed as having familial glucocorticoid deficiency without definitive mineralocorticoid deficiency, and he was treated with oral hydrocortisone replacement therapy. At 17.5 years of age, he exhibited age-appropriate secondary sexual characteristics, with slightly low dehydroepiandrosterone and slightly elevated renin activity. Hershkovitz et al. (2015) reported a 20-year-old Israeli Jewish man who presented at age 10 months with apathy, vomiting, and dehydration, and was found to be severely hyponatremic, with hyperkalemia and significant urinary sodium excretion. All adrenal steroids were reported to be low, and there was minimal response of cortisol to ACTH stimulation. At 6 years of age, he was noted to have skin hyperpigmentation, growth acceleration, testicular volume enlargement, penile growth, and pubic hair; serum testosterone levels were in the pubertal range. Testicular biopsy revealed Leydig cell tumor/adrenal rest tumor, and abdominal CT scan showed normal-sized adrenal glands. Reevaluation after temporary steroid withdrawal showed very low or undetectable basal serum levels of adrenal steroid hormones with very high plasma ACTH concentrations; aldosterone was undetectable and plasma renin activity was normal. His testicular volume and testosterone levels returned to prepubertal values after intensification of his hydrocortisone therapy, and he had onset of central puberty at age 10. At 20 years of age, he was maintained on corticosteroid replacement with no adrenal crises since early childhood, and testicular ultrasound showed no evidence of adrenal rest tumors. His consanguineous parents had 2 earlier-born children who died at 3 and 4 months of age due to a short illness defined as 'gastroenteritis.' Weinberg-Shukron et al. (2015) studied 2 unrelated consanguineous Palestinian families in which 3 children presented in infancy with Addisonian crisis. In the first family, a 3-day-old infant girl had hyperpigmentation, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, inappropriate concomitant natriuria, and hypoglycemia. At age 2.5 years, transient cessation of steroid replacement therapy revealed low cortisol and aldosterone levels despite high ACTH and plasma renin activity. Her male cousin presented at 27 days of life with hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and concomitant hypernatriuria; physical examination was normal, with male genitalia. In addition, another cousin as well as 2 male relatives in the previous generation had similar clinical phenotypes, involving neonatal Addisonian crisis and requiring both mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid replacement therapy for a good clinical response. In the second family, a 9.5-year-old girl presented at age 11 months with Addison disease, including hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypotension, and skin hyperpigmentation. Roucher-Boulez et al. (2016) studied 18 patients from 13 families with primary adrenal insufficiency and mutations in the NNT gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). Severe hypoglycemia, resulting in seizures and sometimes leading to coma, was the main symptom at diagnosis in all but 2 patients. The median age at diagnosis was 11.5 months, and symptoms often included infections and melanoderma. Two unrelated patients presented with salt-wasting, and 3 others with global adrenal insufficiency; long-term follow-up revealed that overall, 14 of the 18 patients had mineralocorticoid deficiency as well as glucocorticoid deficiency. In 2 families, affected sibs exhibited discordant phenotypes, with 1 sib having only glucocorticoid deficiency and the other sib having combined glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid deficiency. Other features in the cohort included cryptorchidism in 2 patients; testicular enlargement followed by onset of puberty with high testosterone levels in 2 other patients, which the authors noted was similar to the case described by Hershkovitz et al. (2015); and bilateral testicular adrenal rest tumors and azoospermia in a 35-year-old man. In addition, 2 patients had hypothyroidism, 1 patient developed progressive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and another patients had 'subnormal imaging' of the heart at age 6 years. Other functions in the patient cohort were normal, including growth and glucose metabolism. In 5 of the 13 families, there had been deaths of other children, which Roucher-Boulez et al. (2016) stated were likely also due to adrenal insufficiency and severe hypoglycemia. The authors concluded that patients with NNT mutations should be followed for mineralocorticoid deficiency, thyroid and cardiac dysfunction, and issues with puberty or fertility.
614739	Wortmann et al. (2006, 2009) reported 4 unrelated girls with an encephalomyopathy associated with mildly and intermittently increased urinary 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. Three children were born of 3 unrelated sets of consanguineous Turkish parents, and the fourth child was born of unrelated Dutch parents. All presented in the neonatal period with severe infections and had episodes of lactic acidosis and hypoglycemia. Other features included failure to thrive, loss of motor skills, mental retardation, sensorineural deafness, and hypotonia with progressive spasticity. One patient had delayed development, 1 did not develop at all, and the other 2 showed developmental regression during early childhood. Brain MRI showed cerebral and cerebellar atrophy as well as bilateral hyperintensities in the basal ganglia reminiscent of Leigh syndrome. Mitochondrial complex I deficiency was found in muscle and fibroblasts. Two patients died at age 3 and 16 years, respectively. Genetic analysis did not find mutations in several candidate genes. Wortmann et al. (2012) reported 11 additional patients with MEGDEL, including 2 relatives of 1 of the Turkish patients reported by Wortmann et al. (2006). The phenotype was relatively homogeneous, with psychomotor retardation, spasticity or dystonia, sensorineural deafness, Leigh syndrome-like lesions on brain imaging, and brain atrophy. Laboratory studies showed 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, increased serum lactate, and defects in oxidative phosphorylation. Patient fibroblasts showed an increased phosphatidylglycerol 34:1 to phosphatidylglycerol 36:1 ratio as well as abnormal cardiolipin subspecies. There was abnormal intracellular accumulation of unesterified cholesterol, and some patients had low serum cholesterol. Sarig et al. (2013) reported 4 males, 2 each from 2 unrelated, highly consanguineous families, with features consistent with MEGDEL syndrome, including 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, sensorineural deafness, encephalopathy, and brain magnetic resonance imaging with findings consistent with Leigh-like syndrome. All 4 patients presented at age 24 to 48 hours with hypotonia and evidence of liver dysfunction, including symptomatic hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, elevated serum transaminase levels, coagulopathy, hyperammonemia, and markedly elevated serum alpha-fetoprotein. During periods of acute infection in the first year of life, the patients experienced a few episodes of liver dysfunction, but these episodes did not recur later in life. Electron microscopy of a liver biopsy from 1 patient showed hepatocyte steatosis with mitochondrial ultrastructural changes, consistent with a mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation disorder and abnormal lipid metabolism. The patients subsequently developed features of MEGDEL syndrome. The families were found to have 2 homozygous mutations in the SERAC1 gene that led to decreased or absent gene expression. Sarig et al. (2013) suggested that neonatal liver disease is a component of the phenotypic spectrum of MEGDEL syndrome and proposed that the disease be renamed MEGDHEL syndrome. Tort et al. (2013) reported a girl, born of unrelated parents, with MEGDEL. She presented on the fourth day of life with respiratory distress, refusal to feed, and jaundice, and was found to have metabolic acidosis with ketonuria, hyperammonemia, and elevated liver enzymes. During the first few years of life, she developed oral dyskinesia, hypotonia, truncal ataxia, episodic ketotic hypoglycemia, and psychomotor deterioration. Brain imaging showed features typical of Leigh syndrome. Urinary analysis showed 3-methylglutaconic and 3-methylglutaric aciduria. Sensorineural deafness and optic atrophy became apparent in her teenage years. At age 19 years, she was severely affected, with microcephaly, poor communication skills, inability to hold up her head, and multiple joint problems. Maas et al. (2017) reviewed the clinical features of 67 patients with MEGDEL, including 39 previously unreported individuals. Most (64%) of the families were consanguineous. Most of the individuals were of European ancestry, although several dozen patients were from Africa, Asia, the Middle East, or Australia, indicating that MEGDEL is a panethnic disorder. With the exception of 2 families with a milder phenotype and onset later in childhood, all affected individuals showed a strikingly homogeneous phenotype and time course. Sixteen patients died at a median age of 9 years, mostly due to respiratory infections. In the neonatal period, 48% of patients showed liver dysfunction and hypoglycemia, with variable abnormal liver enzymes, increased bilirubin, and disturbed coagulation in the more severe cases. Signs of hepatic dysfunction during the first year of life were common in this group, but resolved afterwards. Other presenting symptoms of the disorder included neonatal sepsis, hypotonia, and delayed motor development. The majority of patients lost previously acquired skills in the first year of life. Patients had early-onset progressive spasticity, dystonia, and oropharyngeal dyskinesia, and most (78%) never learned to walk. All had intellectual disability that varied from mild (12%) to severe (73%), and nearly all (93%) were completely dependent for activities of daily living. Additional features included epilepsy (35%), sensorineural hearing impairment (79%), absent speech (58%), impaired vision (42%), retinal pigmentary changes (6%), optic atrophy (25%), recurrent respiratory infections (42%), scoliosis (39%), and poor feeding (79%), often necessitating tube feeding. Less common features included transient renal tubular dysfunction (12%) and cardiac abnormalities (7%). Laboratory studies showed increased urinary 3-MGA and increased serum lactate, and brain imaging showed lesions in the basal ganglia, consistent with Leigh syndrome. Maas et al. (2017) concluded that MEGDEL is best classified as a disorder of the biosynthesis of complex lipids with secondary mitochondrial dysfunction, although MEGDEL syndrome displays typical findings and the progressive course of a mitochondrial disorder. However, mitochondrial dysfunction in tissue varies greatly and may be unremarkable. Radha Rama Devi and Lingappa (2018) reported 2 unrelated Indian patients with MEGDEL. The first patient presented in the neonatal period with respiratory distress, neonatal hepatitis, elevated serum lactate, and metabolic acidosis. At 15 months of age, she had developmental delay and dystonia. At age 7 years she had generalized dystonia, seizures, spasticity, and flexion contractures. Brain MRI showed bilateral abnormal signal in the putamen and caudate. The second patient had normal development until 3 years of age, but then had progressive developmental regression. At age 4 years she had hepatitis, jaundice, and elevated serum lactate. At age 11 years, she had ataxia, severe dystonia, and dysarthria. Brain MRI at age 11 years showed bilateral abnormal signal in the putamen and claustrum. Lumish et al. (2014) reported a 5-year-old boy with developmental delay, developmental regression, bilateral optic nerve atrophy, microcephaly, sensorineural hearing loss, and myoclonic epilepsy. After birth, he had respiratory distress, an anion gap metabolic acidosis, and mild elevations in liver function tests. His developmental milestones were delayed. He experienced developmental regression at 3 years of age. An EEG at age 22 months was suggestive of partial epilepsy. MRI of the brain at age 22 months showed a Leigh syndrome-like pattern. Follow-up MRIs demonstrated progressive basal ganglia and cerebellar volume loss. Roeben et al. (2018) reported a large consanguineous Iraqi kindred in which 6 individuals from 2 different family branches had a relatively mild form of MEGDEL, which was characterized by the authors as 'juvenile-onset complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia' (SPG). The patients ranged in age from 10 to 27 years. All patients were noted to have mild cognitive delay with learning disability and reduced verbal fluency between 2 and 7 years of age. In family branch I, 3 sibs had slowly progressive lower limb spasticity starting in adolescence, but retained the ability to walk. These 3 patients also had febrile seizures. The youngest sib, examined at age 10, did not show spasticity, seizures, or any neurologic signs besides mild cognitive impairment. In family branch II, both affected sibs presented with juvenile-onset progressive spasticity, which progressed more quickly to tetraspasticity. These individuals also had additional abnormalities, including dystonia, progressive speech reduction, and dysphagia. One 33-year-old sib had a sensorimotor mixed axonal and demyelinating peripheral neuropathy. Brain imaging of 5 individuals showed T2-hyperintensities in the basal ganglia, consistent with Leigh-like syndrome, and urine analysis of 2 patients showed a 10-fold increase of 3-MGA. None of the patients had optic atrophy, deafness, or a history of liver failure; history from the neonatal period was not available. Whole-exome sequencing identified a homozygous intronic variant in the SERAC1 gene (614725.0007). The mutation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and segregated with the disorder in the family. Patient cells showed aberrant splicing and absence of the full-length SERAC1 protein, as well as impaired prostaglandin remodeling activity compared to wildtype. However, the prostaglandin imbalances were milder than those observed in patients with the classic infantile-onset disease, suggesting a basis for the milder phenotype in the Iraqi family. The findings expanded the phenotype resulting from SERAC1 mutations, showing a clinical spectrum of severity.
614741	Brivet et al. (2003) reported a girl, born of related Algerian parents, with a severe metabolic disorder resulting in death at age 19 months. At birth, she had respiratory distress, hepatomegaly, lactic acidosis, and transient hypoglycemia. Laboratory studies showed increased serum pyruvate and lactate, a normal lactate/pyruvate ratio, mildly increased ketone bodies, and excretion of organic acids. Although pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency (see, e.g., 312170) was suspected, treatment for that disorder did not result in clinical improvement and patient fibroblasts showed normal pyruvate dehydrogenase activity. The child had an encephalopathy, with severely delayed psychomotor development, rotary nystagmus, hypotonia, extensor plantar responses, and poor visual contact. She also had dysmorphic features, including progressive microcephaly, epicanthus, long philtrum, thin upper lip, and small inverted and widely spaced nipples. Studies of patient fibroblasts showed impaired production of citric acid cycle intermediates and impaired release of CO2 from pyruvate, whereas pyruvate showed normal oxidation in cells with a disrupted mitochondrial membrane or with increasing concentrations of pyruvate. The findings were consistent with a defect in pyruvate transport across the mitochondrial membrane. In a subsequent pregnancy, an affected fetus was recognized using an assay measuring pyruvate oxidation in trophoblasts. Bricker et al. (2012) reported 3 patients from 2 additional consanguineous families with a similar, but less severe, disorder. Affected children had psychomotor retardation, with epilepsy in 1 family and peripheral neuropathy in the other. The patients were alive at 5 to 14 years of age.
614742	Yamaguchi et al. (2005) reported 7 unrelated patients with aplastic anemia who had heterozygous germline mutations in the TERT gene (187270.0001-187270.0005). The patients ranged in age from 31 to 75 years. Bone marrow showed low cellularity, and patient leukocytes had short telomeres (most below 10% of controls) and low telomerase enzymatic activity (most less than 1% of controls). Four patients had family members with hematologic disorders, including myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia. In 1 family, members carrying the mutation also had short telomeres and reduced telomerase activity but no evident hematologic abnormalities. Armanios et al. (2007) reported 5 families in which at least 2 members had adult-onset pulmonary fibrosis. The age at onset ranged from 48 to 77 years. Presenting symptoms included dyspnea or cough, and pulmonary function tests were below predicted values. Only 2 probands had a smoking history. Lung biopsy showed usual interstitial pneumonia or idiopathic interstitial pneumonia. None of the patients had skin abnormalities or cytopenias. Telomere lengths in lymphocytes of affected individuals were at or below 10% of control values. Kirwan et al. (2009) reported 2 unrelated families with variable manifestations of telomere-related pulmonary fibrosis and/or bone marrow failure-1. The proband in 1 family had adult-onset aplastic anemia and fibrosing alveolitis, whereas his father had adult-onset myelodysplastic syndrome. In the second family, the proband presented with adult-onset myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia, whereas her sister had aplastic anemia. Diaz de Leon et al. (2011) compared pulmonary, blood, skin, and bone parameters for 20 subjects from 11 kindreds with familial pulmonary fibrosis with heterozygous TERT mutations and 20 family members who had not inherited a TERT mutation to identify the spectrum of phenotypes associated with mutations in this gene. The 2 groups were matched for sex, age, and cigarette smoking. Three of the TERT mutation carriers already met diagnostic criteria for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The other carriers were apparently healthy. Asymptomatic carriers exhibited significantly lower diffusing capacity of lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO), impaired recruitment of DLCO with exercise, radiographic signs of lung fibrosis, and increased fractional lung tissue volume quantified by high-resolution chest CT scan than noncarriers. Red blood cell and platelet counts were significantly lower, and the mean corpuscular volume and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentrations were significantly higher in carriers than in noncarriers. Carriers reported significantly earlier graying of hair than noncarriers. TERT mutation status was most accurately predicted by short telomere lengths than by any of the measured phenotypes. Parry et al. (2011) demonstrated that a personal and family history of both aplastic anemia and pulmonary fibrosis is highly predictive for the presence of a germline mutation in the TERT or the TERC gene. They performed a retrospective study of 10 patients referred for bone marrow failure or pulmonary fibrosis who had a family history of the other disorder. Six cases presented initially with aplastic anemia and 4 initially with interstitial lung disease. Six of the 10 were subsequently diagnosed with a second feature, including pulmonary or hepatic fibrosis, or hypoplastic marrow. The mean age at diagnosis for those who presented with aplastic anemia was significantly younger than those with pulmonary fibrosis (14 vs 51 years). All patients had at least 1 other first-degree relative with bone marrow failure or pulmonary disease, and the transmission pattern was consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance. In 8 of 10 families, there was phenotypic heterogeneity across generations: older generations first manifested with pulmonary fibrosis, whereas subsequent generations manifested with bone marrow failure at an earlier age. Although none had skin manifestations, most had premature graying of the hair before age 25 years. All 10 probands had a mutation in either the TERT (7 probands) (see, e.g., 187270.0018-187270.0020) or the TERC (3 probands) (see, e.g., 602322.0008 and 602322.0012) gene, and the mutations segregated with the disorder. The mutant genes were associated with very short telomerase length in patient lymphocytes (less than 1% of control values). Parry et al. (2011) concluded that the complex of bone marrow failure and pulmonary fibrosis is highly specific for the presence of a germline telomerase defect. Gansner et al. (2012) reported a 56-year-old man with telomere-related pulmonary fibrosis and bone marrow failure-1. He was diagnosed with pulmonary fibrosis at age 49. He had mild pancytopenia with moderately hypocellular bone marrow. The patient had a family history of a similar disorder: his father and 1 sister had pulmonary fibrosis, a second sister had pulmonary fibrosis and thrombocytopenia, and a third sister had pulmonary fibrosis and acute myeloid leukemia. Telomere lengths in the proband were less than 1% of control values. Gorgy et al. (2015) diagnosed hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) in 9 (21%) of 42 cases with short telomere syndromes and progressive dyspnea who did not have parenchymal lung disease or had only minimal fibrosis that could not explain the hypoxia. The age at presentation was younger than that of pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema (25 vs 55 years). Features included cyanosis, digital clubbing, splenomegaly, elevated liver enzymes, pulmonary vascular abnormalities, and portal hypertension. Affected individuals had evidence of intra- and extra-pulmonary arteriovascular malformations that caused shunt physiology. Nodular regenerative hyperplasia was the most frequent histopathologic abnormality, and it was seen in the absence of cirrhosis. Liver biopsy also showed iron deposits and noncirrhotic portal hypertension. Dyspnea and portal hypertension were progressive, and the median time to death or liver transplant was 6 years. After liver transplant, dyspnea and hypoxia improved, but pulmonary fibrosis progressed. Additional variable syndromic features found in these patients included bone marrow failure, premature hair graying, and mucocutaneous features of DKC. Family history was positive for pulmonary fibrosis, DKC, and aplastic anemia in some cases. All patients had abnormally short telomeres. Six of the 9 cases carried a mutation in the TERT (4 patients), DKC1 (1 patient), or RTEL1 (1 patient) genes. The authors concluded that HPS may cause dyspnea in telomerase gene mutation carriers. Schratz et al. (2023) identified 16 invasive solid tumors in 14 of 226 adults with short telomere syndromes due to mutations in several genes, including at least 1 patient with a TERT mutation. Nearly all (88%) of the tumors were derived from the squamous cell epithelium, most commonly of the head and neck, followed by anal squamous cell carcinoma and skin squamous cell carcinoma. In contrast, there was a lower than expected number of common age-related solid cancers among these patients. Most of the patients who developed squamous cell solid tumors were male. Development of the tumors was associated with CD4+ T-cell lymphopenia, suggesting impaired tumor surveillance by T cells and age-related T-cell exhaustion. Of note, all 3 anal cancers and 1 laryngeal cancer were associated with HPV infection, and 4 of 10 patients with T-cell lymphopenia had secondary causes for the lymphopenia (lung or liver transplant or iatrogenic immunosuppression).
614743	Vulliamy et al. (2002) reported 5 unrelated patients with telomere-related bone marrow failure-2 causing aplastic anemia. Four patients were adults and ranged in age between 22 and 53 years, and 1 was a 5-year-old child. The patients were ascertained from a larger group of 41 patients with aplastic anemia. Fogarty et al. (2003) assessed 2 families with onset of pancytopenia in adults and detected novel point mutations in the TERC gene in affected members of both families (see 602322.0007 and 602322.0008). Affected individuals in both families had no physical signs of dyskeratosis congenita and nearly normal blood counts, but all had severely shortened telomeres, reduced hematopoietic function, and elevated serum erythropoietin and thrombopoietin. Fogarty et al. (2003) concluded that bone marrow failure of variable severity can result from mutations in the TERC gene. Armanios et al. (2007) reported a patient with adult-onset pulmonary fibrosis. There was a family history of pulmonary fibrosis spanning 4 generations. In addition, 3 family members had aplastic anemia and a fourth died of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), probably in the setting of aplastic anemia. Kirwan et al. (2009) reported a boy with telomere-related bone marrow failure-2, manifest as severe aplastic anemia. His father later presented with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) at age 45 years. In vitro studies showed less than 1% telomerase activity, and telomeres in the father were very short. Family history revealed that the boy's paternal grandfather had anemia and thrombocytopenia.Parry et al. (2011) demonstrated that a personal and family history of both aplastic anemia and pulmonary fibrosis is highly predictive for the presence of a germline mutation in the TERT or TERC genes. They performed a retrospective study of 10 patients referred for bone marrow failure or pulmonary fibrosis who had a family history of the other disorder. Six cases presented initially with aplastic anemia and 4 initially with interstitial lung disease. Six of the 10 were subsequently diagnosed with a second feature, including pulmonary or hepatic fibrosis, or hypoplastic marrow. The mean age at diagnosis for those who presented with aplastic anemia was significantly younger than those with pulmonary fibrosis (14 vs 51 years). All patients had at least 1 other first-degree relative with bone marrow failure or pulmonary disease, and the transmission pattern was consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance. In 8 of 10 families, there was phenotypic heterogeneity across generations: older generations first manifested with pulmonary fibrosis, whereas subsequent generations manifested with bone marrow failure at an earlier age. Although none had skin manifestations, most had premature graying of the hair before age 25 years. All 10 probands had a mutation in either the TERT (7 patients) (see, e.g., 187270.0018-187270.0020) or the TERC (3 patients) (see, e.g., 602322.0008 and 602322.0012) gene, and the mutations segregated with the disorder. The mutant genes were associated with very short telomerase lengths in patient lymphocytes (less than 1% of control). Parry et al. (2011) concluded that the complex of bone marrow failure and pulmonary fibrosis is highly specific for the presence of a germline telomerase defect. Schratz et al. (2023) identified 16 invasive solid tumors in 14 of 226 adults with short telomere syndromes due to mutations in several genes, including at least 1 patient with a TERC mutation. Nearly all (88%) of the tumors were derived from the squamous cell epithelium, most commonly of the head and neck, followed by anal squamous cell carcinoma and skin squamous cell carcinoma. In contrast, there was a lower than expected number of common age-related solid cancers among these patients. Most of the patients who developed squamous cell solid tumors were male. Development of the tumors was associated with CD4+ T-cell lymphopenia, suggesting impaired tumor surveillance by T cells and age-related T-cell exhaustion. Of note, all 3 anal cancers and 1 laryngeal cancer were associated with HPV infection, and 4 of 10 patients with T-cell lymphopenia had secondary causes for the lymphopenia (lung or liver transplant or iatrogenic immunosuppression).
614744	Webb et al. (2012) studied 2 brothers, born of consanguineous parents of conservative German American background, who had previously been diagnosed with Moebius syndrome (157900). The sibs were noted to have bilateral facial weakness, sensorineural hearing loss, and esotropia in the first months of life, and developed feeding difficulties and speech delays requiring oromotor and speech therapies. Both underwent surgery to correct esotropia, and both wore glasses for high hyperopia. MRI in the older brother at 8 months of age revealed bilateral absence of the facial nerve and bilateral abnormal tapering of the basal turn of the cochlea. Auditory brainstem response (ABR) testing in both boys revealed bilateral mild to moderate high frequency hearing loss with normal absolute latencies of waveforms, and distortion product otoacoustic emissions were absent in both children, supporting abnormal cochlear function. Stapedius reflexes were intact bilaterally. Examination at 7.25 years and 2.9 years of age, respectively, revealed midface retrusion, low-set and posteriorly rotated ears, upturned nasal tip, and smooth philtrum in both boys. Neither child showed any facial movement. Taste discrimination, salivation, and lacrimation were intact, as was general sensation over the concha of the ear and skin behind the auricle. Webb et al. (2012) noted that because both boys had partially accommodative esotropia with high hyperopia and full eye movements, they did not meet the criteria for Moebius syndrome. Their parents and a brother were unaffected, and there was no family history of strabismus or facial weakness. Uyguner et al. (2015) reported an 7-year-old girl, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with HCFP3. She had facial paresis, midface retrusion, left-sided ptosis with bilateral lagophthalmos, depressed nasal bridge, short nose with anteverted nares, tented vermilion of the upper lip, downturned corners of the mouth, high palate, and low-set ears. She was unable to smile or frown, and nasolabial folds were flattened. She had left esotropia with mild inferior oblique muscle hyperfunction; there was no paralytic component of the sixth cranial nerve, and ABR showed normal results. She had normal neurologic development. Vogel et al. (2016) reported a consanguineous Moroccan family in which 4 individuals had HCFP3. Two brothers presented in childhood with facial paresis, a history of feeding difficulties, and speech delay. A similarly affected paternal uncle and aunt were subsequently identified. All had full eye motility, excluding a clinical diagnosis of Moebius syndrome. The patients had dysmorphic facial features, including masked facies, midface retrusion, upturned nose, smooth philtrum, lagophthalmos, epicanthal folds, flat nasal bridge, and variable cone-shaped incisors. They had mild oral dysfunction due to facial paresis, including feeding and swallowing difficulties, palatal weakness, dysarthria, and speech delay. Brain imaging in the 2 younger patients showed facial nerve hypoplasia with no cochlear abnormalities. However, ABR showed moderate high frequency hearing loss indicating cochlear dysfunction. In addition, all patients had external auricular malformations apparent at birth.
614745	Seltsam et al. (2007) identified 3 different RBC phenotypes with unusual JMH expression in 33 of 44 individuals with abnormal JMH blood groups and their family members. Eleven individuals had a JMH-variant phenotype lacking single JMH epitopes, 18 individuals had a JMH-negative phenotype, and 4 individuals had a JMH-weak phenotype. In most cases, these JMH phenotypes were associated with the presence of JMH or JMH-like antibodies in serum. The 11 remaining individuals, who were family members of individuals with JMH-variant or JMH-negative phenotypes, had normal JHM blood groups. Seltsam et al. (2007) identified 5 propositi with JMH-variant phenotype from Canada, Germany, Japan, Poland, and the U.S. The JMH-variant phenotype was also present in 6 of 14 family members of the propositi. Determination of variant JMH status was based on variably positive or negative reactions of RBCs with anti-JMH serum samples. JMH-like antibodies were only present in the serum of the propositi, which reacted positive with all but JMH-negative RBCs, the propositus's own RBCs, and RBCs of compatible JMH-positive sibs. Seltsam et al. (2007) identified 18 individuals with JMH-negative phenotype from Canada, Germany, Israel, Sweden, Switzerland, and the U.S. The ages of the RBH-negative individuals, as far as known, ranged from 54 to 82 years. The JMH-negative phenotype was identified by negative reaction of the individuals' RBCs with JMH antisera from immunized patients. In addition, no JMH antigen was detected on the surface of JMH-negative RBCs by flow cytometric and immunoblot analyses. JMH antibodies were detected in 14 of the JMH-negative individuals. Four JMH-negative individuals belonged to an apparently healthy family in which the JMH-negative phenotype had been detected in 3 generations. The other JMH-negative individuals were unrelated and information about inheritance was not available. However, in 2 of these individuals, who were apparently healthy, JMH-negative status had remained stable over decades, excluding the transient JMH-negative phenotype. RT-PCR analysis of total mRNA from peripheral blood cells of JMH-negative individuals revealed normal expression of SEMA7A. Peripheral B lymphocytes from JMH-negative individuals could be stimulated to express normal levels of SEMA7A, and reticulocytes from JMH-negative individuals exhibited normal expression of SEMA7A. RBCs of JMH-negative individuals showed normal expression of other GPI-linked membrane proteins, excluding deficient biosynthesis of the GPI anchor as the basis for loss of SEMA7A on RBCs. Seltsam et al. (2007) concluded that the JMH-negative phenotype results from an autoimmune-related and/or RBC lineage-specific posttranscriptional or posttranslational mechanism. Seltsam et al. (2007) identified 4 individuals with RBH-weak phenotype. RBCs from these individuals exhibited weak reactions with JMH antibodies, and JMH antibodies were present in serum samples. In 2 individuals, RBCs produced a weakly positive direct antiglobulin test. Three of the JMH-weak individuals were over 50 years of age, and the fourth was a 32-year-old pregnant woman. The pregnant woman displayed variable SEMA7A expression during pregnancy, and her baby was born without any symptoms of hemolytic disease of the fetus or newborn.
614748	Has et al. (2012) described 3 unrelated children, a boy and 2 girls, who had congenital interstitial lung disease, nephrotic syndrome, and mild epidermolysis bullosa. The index patient was a boy from southern Italy who had respiratory distress at birth requiring high-flow supplemental oxygen; chest x-ray showed severe reticulonodular changes. At 2 weeks of age, he developed renal failure and nephrotic syndrome, and peritoneal dialysis was initiated. From the age of 3 months, the infant had increasing skin fragility, with small blisters and erosions after mechanical manipulation. There was no mucosal involvement. Scalp hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes were fine and sparse. The big toenails became dystrophic, and distal onycholysis followed mild trauma to the fingernails. Renal biopsy at 1 month of age showed globally atrophic glomeruli, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, diffuse interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy, and loss and immaturity of the tubules. At 5.5 months, lung biopsy showed hyperinflation and mild to moderate simplification of air spaces and mild reactive changes in the bronchioles. The infant died at 7.5 months during an episode of pulmonary infection. The second patient was a girl born to healthy consanguineous parents from Gaza, the only affected of 9 sibs, who developed respiratory distress at 2 days of life. At 6 weeks of age, chest x-ray showed bilateral infiltrates, and CT findings were consistent with diffuse interstitial lung disease. Laboratory tests showed proteinuria in the nephrotic range, and peritoneal dialysis was begun. The girl died of multiorgan failure at 2 months of age. The third patient was a Pakistani girl, born to healthy consanguineous parents, who developed fever and respiratory distress at 2 months of age; chest x-ray showed changes consistent with right upper and middle lobe pneumonia. Proteinuria in the nephrotic range was noted, and a renal biopsy at 5 months of age showed focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Progressive renal function deterioration required peritoneal dialysis at 17 months of age. She had recurrent respiratory infections and required supplemental oxygen to maintain peripheral saturation above 90%. At 4 months of age, she developed annular erythematous skin lesions that coalesced into blisters that were consistent with epidermolysis bullosa. She died of multiorgan failure at 19 months of age. Yalcin et al. (2015) reported a male infant, born of consanguineous parents, who presented in the first week of life with respiratory distress and cyanosis in the absence of evidence of infection with microorganisms. Lung imaging was consistent with interstitial lung disease, and biopsy showed abnormal alveolarization and poorly septated alveolar spaces. Laboratory studies showed nephrotic-range proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia associated with crossed fused renal ectopia. The patient had fine sparse scalp hair and dystrophic nails, but no overt clinical skin disease. Skin biopsy showed a junctional split. He died at age 6.5 months of respiratory infection.
614749	Krawitz et al. (2012) reported 2 sisters, born of unrelated British parents, and an unrelated girl with hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation. All 3 patients had normal birth parameters, but were born with anal stenosis or anal atresia with perineal fistula. One of the sisters had vesicoureteral reflux. The unrelated girl also had atrial septal defect, peripheral pulmonary stenosis, left coronal synostosis causing plagiocephaly, enlarged ventricles, and microcephaly (-5 SD). Two of the patients showed poor growth. Psychomotor development was moderately to severely retarded and all showed hypotonia. The unrelated girl died at age 22 months of severe generalized seizures. Common facial features in these patients included wide-set eyes with long palpebral fissures, short nose with broad nasal bridge and tip, and a tented mouth. Fingers showed nail hypoplasia, especially of the second, fourth, and fifth digits, and absent nails of the fifth digits. The halluces were broad, but the toes showed small nails or aplasia of nails, especially of the fourth and fifths digits, all findings consistent with brachytelephalangy. Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was persistently elevated.
614750	Belaya et al. (2012) reported 5 patients from 4 families of European origin with limb-girdle congenital myasthenic syndrome with tubular aggregates on muscle biopsy. The age at onset ranged from 0.5 to 7 years. Presenting symptoms included difficulty walking and frequent falls, but younger patients showed hypotonia and poor head control. Proximal limb muscles were predominantly affected, although some distal muscle groups were also involved. There was minimal involvement of facial, ocular, and bulbar muscles, and only 1 patient had mild ptosis. Two developed scoliosis. Electrophysiologic studies indicated a disorder of the neuromuscular junction, including a decrement on 3-Hz repetitive nerve stimulation and jitter and blocking on single-fiber EMG. All patients benefited from anticholinesterase medication, and 2 showed a response with 3,4-diaminopyridine, which increases acetylcholine release from the nerve terminal. One of the patients had previously been reported by Slater et al. (2006). Muscle biopsy showed structural and functional abnormalities of the neuromuscular junction, including decreased acetylcholine receptor binding sites and decreased postsynaptic folding, consistent with a loss of endplate AChR. All patients reported by Belaya et al. (2012) had tubular aggregates on muscle biopsy, characterized as long membranous tubules packed with different misfolded and aggregated membrane proteins.
614751	Beetz et al. (2012) reported an Austrian family in which 4 adult individuals spanning 3 generations developed a predominant peripheral motor neuronopathy in the first or second decades of life. Three presented with hand muscle weakness and atrophy confined to the thenar and dorsalis interosseus I muscles, and the fourth patient presented with an unstable gait, but also had hand involvement. Three had mild or moderate peroneal atrophy and weakness. All had pes cavus, which ranged from mild to severe. Patellar tendon reflexes were decreased and Achilles tendon reflexes were absent in all patients. None had increased muscle tone or spasticity. Electrophysiologic studies were performed in 3 patients and showed variable results, but mostly decreased amplitude and conduction velocities in the hand and lower legs. Three of the patients were diagnosed with dHMN type V, and 1 with dHMN.
614753	Malan et al. (2010) reported 3 unrelated patients with a similar phenotype consisting of postnatal overgrowth, macrocephaly, advanced bone age, long narrow face, high forehead, slender habitus, scoliosis, unusual behavior characterized especially by anxiety, and mental retardation. One of the patients had previously been diagnosed with a 'Sotos-like syndrome' (see Sotos syndrome, 117550). Jezela-Stanek et al. (2016) reported 2 girls with overgrowth and psychomotor delay, 1 with a missense mutation in the NFIX gene and the other with a 19p13.2 deletion encompassing NFIX and several other genes. The patients shared dysmorphic features including high forehead, downslanting palpebral fissures, pointed chin, and abnormalities of the pinnae, as well as long tapered fingers and malformed toenails. Both exhibited aggressive self-injurious behavior. Noting that both patients had normal birth weights, the authors suggested that postnatal onset of weight gain and increased occipitofrontal circumference are noteworthy features of Malan syndrome, in contrast to Sotos syndrome, in which the overgrowth is usually prenatal and more significant.
614756	Thevenon et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated families and an unrelated single patient with mild intellectual disability and ataxia apparent from infancy. In the first family, 2 adult half sisters had mildly impaired intellectual development, attended schools for special needs, and worked at simple jobs. Both had ataxic gait with static instability; 1 had mild intention tremor. Brain MRI of both women showed mild hippocampal atrophy, simplified gyration of the dentate gyri, posterior cortical atrophy, and cerebellar atrophy. PET scan of 1 woman showed hypometabolism of several cerebral brain regions. Detailed neuropsychologic testing showed defects of rehearsal processing in episodic visual memory. One of the women had 2 affected sons, and the other had 3 affected children. All patients had delayed psychomotor development and gait instability or frank ataxia. More variable features included strabismus, infantile hypotonia, delayed speech, and myoclonic seizures of the upper arm (1 patient). Some patients had mild dysmorphic facial features, such as long face with pointed chin, bulbous nose, long philtrum, and thick lower lip. The mother of the women reportedly had mild intellectual disability. In a second family, a mother and her son and daughter were affected. They had mild intellectual disability; the mother and daughter had ataxic gait. The 2 children had delayed psychomotor development with speech delay. One had neonatal hypotonia and the other had autistic features, poor interactive skills, and bursts of aggression. Mild facial dysmorphism was noted, including large forehead, palpebral edema, wide flat nose, short ears, small mouth, and abnormally implanted teeth. In a third family, a girl had delayed psychomotor development and features of ataxia, including ataxic gait, dysmetria, instability, and dysarthria. Shinawi et al. (2015) reported 3 patients from 2 unrelated families with a neurodevelopmental disorder. The probands in both families were 12-year-old boys with delayed development, intellectual disability/learning disabilities, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, ataxia, dysarthria, and poor fine motor skills. The affected mother of 1 patient had mild intellectual disability, but could drive, cook, and manage her bills. They had some mild and variable dysmorphic features, including short stature, broad forehead, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, strabismus, high-arched palate, small mouth, and low-set ears. The other proband had onset of seizures in infancy that continued throughout childhood and were partially responsive to medication. EEG showed focal epilepsy with secondary generalization. He also had aggressive behavior. Dysmorphic features included tall and broad forehead, broad nasal tip, narrow chin, and prominent ears. This patient had a family history of intellectual disability and epilepsy, but his father did not carry a CAMTA1 mutation, and DNA from the mother was unavailable. All 3 patients also had gastrointestinal problems, including reflux and constipation. Brain imaging of all 3 patients showed mild cerebellar atrophy. Wijnen et al. (2020) reported 4 unrelated patients ranging from 3 to 20 years of age with CECBA. They had delayed motor development with ataxic gait, frequent falls, tremor, dysphagia, and dysarthria. Additional variable features observed in some patients included jerks of the neck and arm, distal upper limb myoclonus, jerky ocular pursuit, slowness, stiff gait with limited swinging of the arms, dysmetria, hyperreflexia with extensor plantar responses, spasticity, and pyramidal signs. The 2 older patients had mild or borderline intellectual disability with language delay and behavioral abnormalities, although 1 patient was able to attend a normal school. Two patients had mild dysmorphic facial features, including broad flat nasal bridge, epicanthal folds, and deep-set eyes. Jacobs et al. (2021) reported 9 unrelated probands, ranging from almost 3 to 14 years of age, with CECBA. The patients were ascertained through collaborative efforts after CAMTA1 mutations were found by genetic analysis, and the phenotypes were retrospectively characterized. The phenotype was highly variable, but all were noted to have poor fine and gross motor skills and speech delay, often with dysarthria, from early childhood. Most had hypotonia with mildly delayed sitting and walking (up to 3 years for walking), usually with an unsteady or ataxic gait with frequent falls. Poor coordination was also observed. Early feeding problems and gastroesophageal reflux occurred in about half of the patients; 1 required a feeding tube. Intellectual development was highly variable: although several had mild intellectual disability (IQ range 67 to 88), at least 1 patient had normal cognitive function at age 4. About half had behavioral problems, including attention deficit, hyperactivity, and aggression. Three patients had seizures. Brain imaging was abnormal only in 4 of 8 patients studied and the findings included delayed myelination and white matter hyperintensities. Only 1 patient had mild atrophy of the cerebellar vermis. Six patients had variable and nonspecific dysmorphic facial features, such as large forehead, slanted palpebral fissures, long philtrum, thin upper lip, strabismus, and hirsutism. The mothers of 2 patients (patients 5 and 8), who also carried a mutation, had some features of the disorder, including learning disabilities, psychiatric disturbances, poor coordination, and tremor. The mother of patient 9, who carried a mutation, was reportedly asymptomatic. Jacobs et al. (2021) reported a tenth proband with a D136G missense variant of uncertain significance in the CAMPTA1 gene that segregated with a similar disorder within the family. Dzinovic et al. (2021) reported a 4-year-old French girl (family 2) with mild ataxic gait, visual and hearing abnormalities, and mild intellectual disability. Brain imaging showed white matter hyperintensities. Agarwal et al. (2016) reported a 25-year-old man who presented with progressive head, arm, and leg tremor that began in the hands around 10 years of age. He had difficulty with social interactions, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and anxiety, but did not have intellectual disability. He worked as a paramedic. Other features included scoliosis, asthma, gastroesophageal reflux, mild muscle weakness, stooped posture, decreased arm swing, and decreased vibratory sensation in the lower limbs, suggesting peripheral neuropathy. Dysmorphic features included long face, prominent ears, and high-arched palate. Brain imaging was normal. Family history was significant for tremor in his father and paternal grandfather, as well as Parkinson disease on both sides of the family. Dzinovic et al. (2021) reported a 44-year-old Czech woman (family 1) who developed generalized jerky movements of the head and upper limbs at the age of 16. The movement disorder was progressive, and she developed frank myoclonic jerks, abnormal posturing, clumsiness, mild cervical and limb dystonia, slow repetitive hand movements, and upper limb ataxia. She had mild intellectual disability, OCD, and anxiety. Her maternal grandfather reportedly had adult-onset limb tremor, and her mother had adult-onset jerky movements of the arms. The 14-year-old son of the proband did not have a movement disorder, but had ADHD, anxiety, and moderate intellectual disability. Brain imaging was normal in the proband and her son; the mother was not imaged. Whole-exome sequencing identified a heterozygous 8-bp deletion (c.3585_3592del) in the CAMTA1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination (Trp1197ArgfsTer28). The mutation segregated with the disorder in 3 generations of the family.
614779	Perles et al. (2012) reported 2 brothers, born of consanguineous Arab-Muslim parents, with variable manifestations of visceral heterotaxy and mutation in the CCDC11 gene. The younger brother, aged 14 years, presented with congenital heart disease and severe cyanosis. Echocardiography showed a complex cardiovascular defect and abdominal situs abnormalities. He died after corrective surgery. Radiographs showed midline liver and inverted stomach and spleen. His heart malformation included dextrocardia, a complete unbalanced atrioventricular canal defect with single atrium and common atrioventricular valve, hypoplastic left ventricle with bulboventricular foramen, double outlet right ventricle with transposition of the great arteries, severe pulmonary stenosis, right aortic arch, abnormal systemic venous return, and total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage. In contrast, his 17-year-old, apparently healthy brother was found to have situs inversus totalis with normal cardiac anatomy and function. He had no respiratory symptoms, and sperm count, structure, and motility were normal. Light microscopy examination of a nasal sample showed beating ciliated cells, and electron microscopy showed normal ciliary ultrastructure with typical 9:2 doublet microtubules, excluding a ciliary defect. Narasimhan et al. (2015) reported a patient (OP-1069-II1), born of consanguineous parents, with situs inversus totalis and mutation in the CCDC11 gene. He had mild respiratory symptoms, including recurrent cough and sinusitis, but normal nasal nitric oxide levels. Further clinical details were not provided. Noel et al. (2016) studied 3 affected individuals from 2 consanguineous families with heterotaxy and mutation in the CFAP53 gene. In family A, from Saudi Arabia, a brother and sister both exhibited dextrocardia. The brother also had asplenia, and the sister had situs inversus. The brother was marked as deceased in the family pedigree, but the cause was not reported. In family B, from Sudan, 1 of 2 brothers displayed dextrocardia.
614782	Merner et al. (2012) reported a large multigenerational family with essential tremor. The age at onset was variable, ranging from the first to the fifth decade. Life expectancy was normal, and several patients over the average age of ALS onset had no symptoms of that disease.
614800	In the linguistically and geographically isolated Yakut population of northeastern Siberia, previously studied for the presence of autosomal dominant and recessive as well as X-linked recessive genetic diseases (Nogovitsina et al., 1999; Tarskaia et al., 2003; Tarskaia et al., 2004), Maksimova et al. (2010) ascertained 34 Yakut patients, 22 female and 12 male, all of whom had postnatal growth failure, loose and senile skin with depressed turgor of tissue, micromelia, brachydactyly, and bilateral optic nerve atrophy with nonprogressive loss of visual acuity, associated with complete or incomplete achromatopsia (color blindness). In addition, all of the patients who underwent hematologic examination (22 patients from 21 families) had a high frequency of hypolobulation of granulocyte nuclei, characteristic of Pelger-Huet anomaly. Features seen in at least 28 (82%) of the 34 patients included a brachycephalic skull with hypoplasia of the frontal and parietal tubers and narrow forehead, long senile face with small features, small orbits, bilateral exophthalmos, hypoplastic cheekbones, straight nose with prominent glabella, long philtrum, thin lips, high voice with harsh timber, short neck, hypermobility of small joints, muscular hypotonia, and wide feet with high arch. Other commonly seen features included fine hair, facial asymmetry, thick and/or bushy eyebrows, epicanthus, sandal gap, and wide big toes. All but 1 of the patients had normal intellectual function. Maksimova et al. (2010) designated the phenotype 'SOPH syndrome,' for short stature, optic atrophy, and Pelger-Huet anomaly.
614807	Majczenko et al. (2012) reported a family in which 5 individuals had early-onset myopathy. Features included neonatal hypotonia or increased falls with distal more than proximal muscle involvement, myalgias, and mild to moderate overall motor impairment. Ambulation was preserved, and the face, extraocular, cardiac, and respiratory muscles were not affected. Most patients had mild cognitive impairment requiring special education. Skeletal muscle biopsy from the 5-year-old proband showed type 1 fiber predominance, fiber-size variability, centralized nuclei, and core-like areas. Immunostaining showed actin- and desmin-positive aggregates. Electron microscopic studies showed a disrupted contractile apparatus, loss of the normal sarcomeric striation, Z-band streaming, sparse or absent mitochondria in the center of the lesion with secondary mitochondrial accumulation at the periphery, and distention of transverse-tubules. Biopsy from a 10-month-old patient showed fiber-type variability and increased central nuclei, as well as desmin and actin immunoreactive aggregates. The pathologic diagnosis was reported as a congenital myopathy with prominent internal nuclei, atypical core-like lesions, and desmin-positive aggregates.
614808	Among 22 patients with ALS that resulted from mutations in PFN1, all displayed limb onset. Given that bulbar onset represents approximately 25% of ALS cases, Wu et al. (2012) proposed that their observation suggests a common clinical phenotype among ALS patients with PFN1 mutations. The age of onset for familial ALS18 patients was 44.8 +/- 7.4 years.
614809	Gale et al. (2010) reported 2 unrelated families with an autosomal dominant form of glomerulonephritis resulting in renal failure. Both families had ancestors from the Troodos mountains of Cyprus. Additional patients of Cypriot origin with a similar disorder were subsequently identified. In all, there were 26 patients from 11 families. All had microscopic hematuria, and many developed macroscopic hematuria following upper respiratory tract infections. Renal biopsies showed glomerulonephritis with C3 (120700) deposits in the subendothelium and mesangium. There was also mesangial matrix expansion, increased glomerular cellularity, and segmental capillary wall thickening. The initial pathologic diagnosis in these patients was membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type I, which was later refined to C3 glomerulonephritis. The risk of progression appeared to be greater in men than in women with the disease. None of the patients had evidence of retinal disease. In a comment on the report of Gale et al. (2010), Karumanchi and Thadhani (2010) noted the clinical similarity of this disorder, which they termed 'CFHR5 nephropathy,' to IgA nephropathy (161950). Athanasiou et al. (2011) reported 91 patients from 16 families of Cypriot origin with C3G3. The cohort included the 26 patients reported by Gale et al. (2010). All affected individuals carried the exon 2-3 founder duplication mutation in the CFHR5 gene (608593.0001) in the heterozygous state. Clinical details were provided for 4 of the families, and general clinical information was provided for the remaining patients. There was wide phenotypic heterogeneity: about 10% of mutation carriers were asymptomatic, about half (56%) had episodes of macroscopic hematuria, and 31% had hematuria, hypertension, and proteinuria that developed into chronic renal failure and end-stage renal disease between 30 and 72 years of age. A few patients (3%) had hematuria and proteinuria but did not progress to end-stage renal disease. In some cases, the hematuria and renal disease were exacerbated following an upper respiratory infection. Renal biopsy, when performed, showed mesangial electron-dense deposits as well as thickening of the glomerular basement membrane due to intramembranous or subendothelial electron-dense deposits. C3 immunoreactivity was observed in the biopsies; serum C3 levels were normal. There was a striking gender difference, with males being more affected than females. Proteinuria with chronic renal failure was found in 35% of males compared to 0% of females between 31 and 50 years. This incidence rose to 80% in males over age 50, compared to about 20% of females over 50. Ten of 18 patients with end-stage renal disease underwent renal transplant with good results. Besbas et al. (2014) reported a 16-year-old girl of Turkish descent with C3G3. She presented with periorbital edema, proteinuria, and low serum C3; she did not have hematuria. Renal biopsy showed membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis with C3 deposition, subendothelial deposits, and capillary basement membrane thickening. She did not have mutations in the CFH or CFI genes, but genetic analysis identified a heterozygous C269R variant in the CFHR5 gene that was predicted to be damaging. Functional studies of the variant were not performed. The report expanded the phenotype associated with CFHR5 variants. Vernon et al. (2012) reported a girl who developed chronic glomerulonephritis with C3 deposits following a streptococcal infection. The patient presented at age 7 years with dark-colored proteinuria after a 10-day history of fever and sore throat. After treatment for the infection, she had persistent hematuria and proteinuria. Nine months later, kidney biopsy showed mesangial hypercellularity, segmental endocapillary hypercellularity, and segmental capillary wall double contours. There was mesangial and capillary deposition of C3, C9 (120940), and CFHR5. Electron microscopy showed thickening of the glomerular basement membranes, intramembranous electron-dense deposits, and subendothelial and subepithelial deposits. Twenty months after presentation, a second kidney biopsy showed persistent membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis with tubulointerstitial scarring. Serum CFHR5 was decreased to 37.3% of control values. Treatment with an angiotensin receptor (see 106165) blocker resulted in improved kidney function.
614813	Turnpenny and Thwaites (1992) reported a 14-month-old girl, born of consanguineous parents, who had short stature of prenatal onset, rhizomelic limb shortness particularly affecting the upper limbs, and unusual face. Features included relative macrocephaly, frontal balding, midface hypoplasia, small nose, macrostomia with downturned corners of the mouth, gingival hypertrophy, and hypoplasia or absence of the clitoris. Skeletal x-rays showed a dome-shaped thorax with delayed ossification of the proximal humeral and femoral epiphyses; there were no gross modeling, metaphyseal, or epiphyseal defects, and no vertebral dyssegmentation. Gross motor development was delayed, with her first steps coming at 18 months of age, at which time she had normal fine motor development, vision, and hearing, and a vocabulary of approximately 15 words. Follow-up examination at 9 years of age by Shalev et al. (2012) revealed small hands with short rectangular fingers and hypoplastic fingernails, a triangular-shaped face with protruding forehead and relatively deep-set eyes, large nose, and pointy chin with retrognathia. She also had irregularly positioned and crowded teeth, with severe dental caries. Shalev et al. (2012) studied 8 affected individuals with severe disproportionate short stature, 1 of whom had previously been described by Turnpenny and Thwaites (1992), from 2 unrelated consanguineous Israeli families of Arab Muslim ancestry. The adult height of the affected individuals was between 112 and 127 cm, and was due to pre- and postnatal growth retardation. At a young age, patients had short stature, a relatively large head, and a long triangular face; the phenotype evolved to one in which the head was relatively small and the mandible large and pointy. Affected individuals had normal cognitive abilities and lacked any neurologic deficits. Other typical features included prominent nose, voice with an unusual high-pitched sound, relatively small ears, clinodactyly, brachydactyly, small hands, hypoplastic fingernails, waddling gait, and sparse hair after puberty. Characteristic skeletal changes included short long bones, especially femurs and humeri, with mild metaphyseal changes and very short femoral necks. One affected male from each of the families developed type 2 diabetes mellitus in the third decade of life, and both were also diagnosed with oligo-azoospermia. In addition, a 23-year-old female from the first family had Tanner stage III secondary sexual characteristics, with infantile breasts and no axillary hair; extensive metabolic and endocrine evaluation was normal. Two affected individuals from the first pedigree and 1 from the second also had various dental anomalies, including cone-shaped, widely spaced teeth, missing teeth of the right maxilla, and irregularly positioned, crowded teeth with severe dental caries. Shaheen et al. (2012) described affected children from 3 unrelated consanguineous Saudi families who had primordial dwarfism with a distinctive facial dysmorphism. In the first family, 2 sisters and their male cousin had profound growth deficiency, relative macrocephaly, and distinct facial features involving an elongated triangular face, high forehead, hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, broad upturned nose, long philtrum, and posteriorly rotated low-set ears. Psychomotor development was normal. In the second family, a 6-year-old boy had primordial dwarfism and severe global developmental delay, as well as facial dysmorphism bearing a striking resemblance to those in the first family. His features included high forehead, deep-set eyes, prominent columella, dolichocephaly, stubby fingers, and hypotonia. In the third family, a 2.75-year-old boy had primordial dwarfism, global developmental delay, and facial features similar to those of the patients from the first 2 families, as well as small hands and feet. Skeletal survey showed diffuse osteopenia, striking epiphyseal hypoplasia particularly in the proximal humerus and femur, 2-year bone age delay, and short and broad carpals, metacarpals, tarsals, and metatarsals.
614814	Hassed et al. (2012) reported 2 families segregating autosomal dominant Adams-Oliver syndrome. In the first family, the female proband was noted to have cutis aplasia at birth and syndactyly of her second and third toes but otherwise normal extremities. She had microcephaly, short palpebral fissures, and mild motor delay. Her father had microcephaly, borderline mental retardation, and short distal phalanges of the fingers, with absent toes and short metatarsals bilaterally. In the second family, there were 8 affected individuals over 3 generations, including a mother with shortened distal phalanges of the left hand, bilateral reduction of the toes, and normal intelligence, who had a daughter with cutis aplasia, asymmetric shortening of the hands bilaterally, asymmetric reductions of the feet, and intellectual deficits, and a mildly affected son with fifth-finger nail aplasia, fifth-toe shortening, and normal development. The mother's brother had mild limb reductions of his hands and normal intelligence. Neither family had heart defects, immune defects, or other associated anomalies.
614815	Thomas et al. (2012) studied 2 sibs, aged 13 and 6 years, from a consanguineous Turkish family with Joubert syndrome. Both sibs had vermis agenesis and the molar tooth sign as well as severe kyphoscoliosis. The older sib also had polydactyly and camptodactyly, abnormal eye movements, breathing anomalies, severe mental retardation, and joint laxity, whereas the younger sib had intrauterine growth retardation, oral anomalies, micrognathia, horseshoe kidney, and ventricular septal defect. Huppke et al. (2015) reported a boy with JBTS18 who presented at age 12 years with an ataxic gait and severely impaired intellectual development. At birth, he was noted to have postaxial polydactyly of the left foot. At age 5 months, he showed developmental delay and hypotonia. He could sit at age 18 months and could walk unsupported at age 4 years. He had initially been diagnosed with autism because of a lack of social interaction and repetitive behaviors and rituals. Brain MRI showed enlargement of the fourth ventricle and the molar tooth sign with vermis hypoplasia and thickened cerebellar peduncles.
614816	Lindsay et al. (2012) studied 8 families segregating autosomal dominant aortic aneurysm in association with variable other features, including hypertelorism, bifid uvula, pectus deformity, bicuspid aortic valve, arterial tortuosity, arachnodactyly, scoliosis, clubfeet, and thin skin with easy bruising and striae. Ectopia lentis was not observed. Histologic examination of aortic tissue from an affected family member showed elastic fiber fragmentation and higher collagen and proteoglycan deposition versus control. Boileau et al. (2012) reported 2 large families segregating autosomal dominant thoracic aortic aneurysm and aortic dissection with decreased penetrance, along with intracranial aneurysm and subarachnoid hemorrhage. Additional features in affected individuals included arterial tortuosity, high-arched palate, pectus deformity, arachnodactyly, scoliosis, flat feet, joint hyperflexibility, skin striae, and dural ectasia. The median age at aortic disease presentation was 35 years, with the majority of affected family members presenting aneurysms at the level of the sinuses of Valsalva. Although features overlapping those of Marfan syndrome (MFS; see 154700) were found in some individuals, they were insufficient in any individual to meet the diagnostic criteria for MFS. Ectopia lentis was absent in these families. Histologic examination of aortic tissue from 2 affected individuals showed pathology typical for thoracic aortic disease, with fragmentation and loss of elastin fibers and accumulation of proteoglycans in the tunica media. Gago-Diaz et al. (2014) reported a large 4-generation Spanish pedigree segregating autosomal dominant thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection with or without bicuspid aortic valve. Affected members of the family presented some minor connective tissue disease signs such as joint laxity, scoliosis, flat feet, dolichocephaly, and high palate; however, none met standard diagnostic criteria for Marfan (154700), Ehlers-Danlos (see 130000), or Loeys-Dietz syndromes or any other described disorder of connective tissue. One affected member had a bicuspid aortic valve.
614817	Spoendlin et al. (1995) reported 3 unrelated adult patients who presented with asymptomatic, slowly progressive renal dysfunction identified by routine laboratory investigation. Two patients had proteinuria, and 1 had hypertension. All had a history of recurrent infections earlier in life. Urine cytology of a son of one of the patients showed a few cells with enlarged nuclei; his renal function was normal. Renal biopsy in the 3 probands showed markedly enlarged and hyperchromatic nuclei in tubular epithelial cells in all parts of the nephron. Electron microscopy showed bizarrely enlarged nuclei with an irregular distribution of chromatin. In all cases, there was interstitial fibrosis surrounding atrophic tubules, and some of the glomeruli were completely sclerosed. Immunohistochemical studies showed significantly increased PCNA (176740), suggesting active DNA synthesis and perhaps an inhibition of mitosis in these cells. Spoendlin et al. (1995) postulated a genetic defect causing an induction of DNA repair. Godin et al. (1996) reported a French brother and sister with onset of progressive renal failure at ages 32 and 42 years, respectively. Neither had a history of recurrent infections. Both had mild proteinuria and glycosuria. Both had persistent elevation of liver enzymes, which was more marked in the brother, but his liver biopsy was normal. Renal biopsies of both patients showed enlarged and hyperchromatic nuclei in tubular epithelial cells as well as in endothelial cells of the peritubular capillaries. Both had high levels of blood and urine ochratoxin A, a mycotoxin known to be nephrotoxic. The brother underwent renal transplantation and had normal renal function 10 years later. Baba et al. (2006) reported a 39-year-old man who presented with asymptomatic progressive renal failure. He also had mild hypertension and mildly increased liver enzymes. Renal biopsy showed globally sclerosed glomeruli, interstitial fibrosis with tubular atrophy, and karyomegaly in tubular epithelial cells. Electron microscopy showed uneven chromatin distribution in the nuclei. The disorder progressed to stage IV chronic renal failure and the patient was worked-up for transplantation. Monga et al. (2006) reported 2 Italian sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with karyomegalic interstitial nephritis. The patients presented at ages 31 and 22 years, respectively. The older sister had a history of repeated respiratory infections. At age 38, she had severe renal failure. Renal biopsy showed hyalinized glomeruli, large nuclei in tubular epithelial cells, atrophic tubules, and interstitial fibrosis. Karyomegalic changes were also noted in a skin biopsy and liver biopsy. She underwent kidney transplantation at age 42, but died 20 days later. Postmortem examination showed karyomegalic cells in multiple tissues, including endothelial cells in the brain and lung, fibroblasts of the thyroid and myocardium, Schwann cells, the esophagus, and smooth muscle cells of the aorta. Her younger brother had severe chronic renal failure and chronic liver disease with increased liver enzymes and cholestasis. Renal biopsy was similar to his sister's, with hyperchromatic nuclei and nuclei with dispersed chromatin. Karyomegalic cells were also observed in a duodenal biopsy. He developed chronic renal failure requiring dialysis and died 6 years after presentation. Monga et al. (2006) also reported an unrelated Italian man with a less severe form of the disorder. Palmer et al. (2007) reported a 44-year-old Maori woman who presented with pneumonia and was found to have renal insufficiency on biochemical studies. She also had normocytic anemia requiring transfusion. Renal ultrasound showed atrophic and echogenic kidneys, and urinalysis showed protein and glucose. Renal biopsy revealed karyomegalic changes in the tubules, dilated tubules, and tubular atrophy. Cytology of the urine showed irregular, large, vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli and atypical features, which Palmer et al. (2007) noted could mimic carcinoma. Family history revealed a brother with karyomegalic interstitial nephritis. Verine et al. (2010) reported a 50-year-old French woman who presented with asymptomatic renal failure and mild proteinuria without hematuria. Renal biopsy showed large tubulointerstitial fibrosis and massively enlarged tubular epithelial cell nuclei, consistent with karyomegalic interstitial nephritis. Family history revealed a brother who died of renal insufficiency at 35 years of age. In the patient reported by Verine et al. (2010), Zhou et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygous mutations in the FAN1 gene (613534.0005 and 613534.0006).
614819	Haji-Seyed-Javadi et al. (2012) studied a large consanguineous Iranian family in which a brother and sister and their cousin had Weill-Marchesani syndrome, whereas 3 older sibs of the brother and sister displayed some features of WMS without meeting diagnostic criteria for the disorder. The proband was a 17-year-old boy who had ectopia lentis, myopia, elevated intraocular pressure, shallow anterior chamber, microspherophakia, short stature, brachydactyly, joint stiffness, and pulmonary and aortic stenosis. His 19-year-old sister also showed all of these features. In addition, 3 sibs had no eye findings but displayed some of the other features of WMS: a 30-year-old sister had brachydactyly, joint stiffness, and pulmonary and aortic stenosis; a 36-year-old brother had brachydactyly, joint stiffness, and pulmonary stenosis; and a 22-year-old sister had pulmonary and aortic stenosis. Their 37-year-old female cousin displayed all of the eye findings as well as brachydactyly and joint stiffness, but did not have pulmonary or aortic stenosis.
614820	Verret and Steele (1971) first characterized alternating hemiplegia in childhood as a distinct condition. They reported 8 patients, including 2 sibs, with the disorder. All had intermittent hemiparesis of variable severity beginning in infancy or early childhood. Episodes usually lasted minutes or hours, with a few patients having weakness for several days. Only 2 patients had intermittent seizures. Four patients had residual neurologic deficits including mental retardation and a movement disorder, such as dystonia and/or choreoathetosis. Attacks ceased spontaneously in 2 patients by age 4 years. EEG in all patients showed no constant focal abnormality or evidence of seizure activity. Some patients later developed headaches, and all had relatives with migraine headaches. Heinzen et al. (2012) reported 82 patients with AHC2 confirmed by genetic analysis. Affected individuals had infantile onset of hemiplegic attacks, usually associated with episodes of quadriparesis, abnormal eye movements, autonomic signs, seizures, dystonia, ataxia, chorea, and developmental delay. Most cases occurred sporadically, but there was 1 family of Puerto Rican origin in which 4 affected individuals were described in detail. One child in this family had onset at 2 months of age of tonic stiffening and eye deviation, but without loss of consciousness. By age 1 year, he had episodes of flaccid hemiplegia alternating with dystonia. He also had generalized tonic-clonic seizures that stopped by age 5 years. Hemiplegic episodes lasted from 5 to 30 minutes, and EEG showed no abnormalities during episodes. In childhood, he showed permanent neurologic sequelae, including mild cognitive impairment, ataxia, chorea, and dysarthria. At age 16 years, he had episodic severe dystonia and parkinsonism several times per month. This patient's brother developed whole body stiffening at age 3 years. Typical spells rendered him mute and unable to ambulate. In childhood, he had mild cognitive impairment, behavioral abnormalities, hypotonia, ataxia, dysarthria, and chorea. Since childhood, the father had episodic hemiplegic spells since childhood, accompanied by tonic or dystonic stiffening and abnormal eye movements. He also had rare generalized seizures. At age 41 years, he had neurocognitive deficits, depression, and anxiety. The father's brother had onset of hemi- and quadriplegia since age 6 months. As an adult, he continued to have episodes of flaccidity or parkinsonism-like rigidity. Simultaneously and independently, Rosewich et al. (2012) reported 24 unrelated patients with AHC2 confirmed by genetic analysis. The patients ranged in age from 8 to 35 years, and all except 1 had onset before age 7 months. Most patients presented with a dystonic episode, although a few presented with nystagmus or seizures. The patient with the latest onset presented with hemiplegic episodes at age 16 months. Additional variable paroxysmal features included abnormal ocular movements, bulbar symptoms, autonomic dysfunction, and respiratory disturbances. Nonparoxysmal features included delayed psychomotor development with intellectual disability, hypotonia, choreoathetosis, ataxia, and dysarthria. Patients had abrupt onset of dystonic episodes that could be triggered by physical or emotional stress, a rostrocaudal gradient of involvement, and prominent bulbar findings. Rosewich et al. (2012) noted the clinical overlap between AHC2 and DYT12, and considered the disorders to be part of a phenotypic spectrum. Yang et al. (2014) reported 47 Chinese children with typical AHC. All patients had abnormal eye movement and hemiplegia. Up to 70.2% of the patients developed their first symptom before 4 months, and 40.4% before 2 months. Abnormal eye movement was the initial symptom in 57.4% of the patients at a median age as early as 2 months, making it the most common and earliest symptom of the disorder. All patients had developmental delay, but only some developed epilepsy. Treatment with flunarizine, a calcium channel blocker, reduced the severity, duration, or frequency of the hemiplegic attacks in 68.3% of the patients, but did not lead to complete cure. Balestrini et al. (2020) evaluated the cardiac phenotype in 110 patients with ATP1A3-related disorders, including 98 with AHC2, 9 with DYT12, and 3 with CAPOS; 22 of the AHC2 patients were previously reported, whereas all of the DYT12 and CAPOS patients were newly reported. Seizures were reported in 58 patients, status epilepticus in 21, and autonomic dysfunction in 60. Syncope, which was the only reported symptom related to cardiac function, was seen in 3 patients. Resting electrocardiograms were abnormal in 52 of 87 individuals with AHC2 who were tested, and serial electrocardiograms showed dynamic changes in 10 of 18 patients with AHC2 who were tested. Echocardiograms did not show structural abnormalities in any of the patients who were tested. Three patients with AHC2 underwent implantation of a cardiac loop recorder, and all 3 subsequently underwent implantation of an implantable cardiac defibrillator or a permanent pacemaker based on findings from the loop recorder records.
614822	Kuo et al. (2012) studied 2 infertile men with SEPT12 mutations. The first man had asthenoteratozoospermia, with a sperm count of 20.5 x 10(6)/ml, morphology that was 92% abnormal, and a total motility of 48% (42% rapid progressive motility, 6% slow progressive motility, and 52% nonprogressive motility). The second man had oligoasthenozoospermia, with a sperm count of 0.9 x 10(6)/ml, morphology that was 80% abnormal, and a total motility of 22% (consisting of 22% slow progressive motility and 78% nonprogressive motility; no rapid progressive motility was seen in this patient's sperm). Atomic force microscopy of the second man's sperm detected loss of the annular structure and a bent tail, as well as outward exposure of the flagellar axoneme. The height of the annulus site was about 20 to 40 nm, significantly lower than in a control (160 nm). Under bright-field and fluorescence microscopy, the sperm had multiple defects; transmission electron microscopy showed noncondensed chromatin material, cytoplasmic droplets, a shrunken joining point with minimal connection, and a bent tail.
614823	Tan et al. (2012) studied 2 patients with aortic valve disease. One was a man who at 30 years of age was undergoing evaluation for hypertension and was found to have a bicuspid aortic valve with mild aortic stenosis and aortic coarctation. He underwent repair of the coarctation, and subsequently developed significant aortic stenosis and underwent aortic valve replacement and re-repair of the aortic arch. At that time it was noted that the transverse aortic arch, proximal to and distant from the previous conduit, was heavily calcified. There was no evidence of inappropriate calcification in noncardiovascular tissues. The other patient studied by Tan et al. (2012) presented with a heart murmur at 18 months of age and was found to have bicuspid aortic valve with moderate aortic stenosis, without evidence of coarctation. Park et al. (2019) reported a 42-year-old Korean man with ascending aorta dilation in whom echocardiography revealed a severely calcified bicuspid aortic valve. CT angiography showed significant dilation of the ascending aorta, with a diameter of 5.5 cm, and confirmed dense calcification in the aortic valve. By echocardiography of the aortic root, the aortic valve annulus was measured at 2.5 cm, the sinus of Valsalva at 3.1 cm, and the sinotubular junction at 3.3 cm. The BAV was of the lateral subtype. There was no family history of cardiovascular disease.
614826	Xiao et al. (2012) studied 17 affected and 8 unaffected members of a 4-generation Chinese family segregating autosomal dominant congenital nystagmus, with multiple instances of male-to-male transmission. All affected individuals had horizontal pendular nystagmus that was present since infancy. Corneas were normal, as was funduscopic examination, except in 2 patients who had myopic changes. Two affected males had red-green color vision defects found on screening using Ishihara plates, but another affected individual had normal cone and rod responses on electroretinography. None of the affected individuals had photophobia, night blindness, hypo- or hyperpigmentation in the iris or retina, ataxia, or other noticeable systemic abnormalities. Li et al. (2012) studied 9 affected and 6 unaffected members of a 3-generation Chinese family (family 86001) segregating autosomal dominant congenital nystagmus. All patients had nystagmus since infancy. Clinical examination of all patients demonstrated horizontal pendular nystagmus, clear corneas, normal irides without pigmentary anomalies, transparent lenses, and normal fundi and foveal reflexes. All patients showed normal color vision on screening with Ishihara plates, and none had photophobia or night blindness.
614830	Manzini et al. (2012) reported 3 unrelated families with classic features of Walker-Warburg syndrome, including cobblestone lissencephaly, enlarged ventricles, cerebellar hypoplasia, eye abnormalities, and hypotonia. The patients in 2 families died within the first months of life. In the third family, 2 affected pregnancies were terminated at 23 and 20 weeks' gestational age due to severe ventricular enlargement.
614831	Guergueltcheva et al. (2012) reported 10 patients from 5 families with spinocerebellar ataxia. All families belonged to the Roma Bowlmaker ethnic group in Bulgaria, a young Gypsy population subisolate with low genetic diversity. The patients ranged in age from 6 to 57 years, but all had infantile onset of delayed psychomotor development. Three never walked and 5 never learned to talk; mental retardation ranged from mild to profound. All patients had moderate to severe gait and stance ataxia, with variable mild dysarthria, dysmetria, tremor, and dysdiadochokinesia. Only a few patients had mild pyramidal signs in the lower limbs. Two patients had seizures. About half of patients had variable ophthalmologic abnormalities, including horizontal nystagmus, hypometric saccades, abduction deficits, esotropia, and ptosis. Other features included short stature in adults, pes planus, and hypotonia. Brain MRI showed generalized cerebellar atrophy with a small inferior vermis. Five patients had a small brain overall. Most patients had mildly enlarged ventricles and retrocerebellar cysts. The disorder appeared to be slowly progressive. Davarniya et al. (2015) reported 3 Iranian sibs (family 9000105), aged 28, 37, and 40 years, with moderately to severely impaired intellectual development, nystagmus, ataxia, short stature, and aggressive behavior. All had seizures starting within the first 2 years of life. Brain MRI in the youngest sib showed cerebellar atrophy and an increased number of cerebellar cisterns. Cabet et al. (2019) reported a 6-year-old boy who had psychomotor delay and axial hypotonia noted at 6 months of age. He had dysmetria at age 1 year, and head nodding was seen at age 3 years. He also had dystonic and choreiform movements. Ophthalmologic examination at age 10 months showed strabismus and vertical gaze-evoked nystagmus. He had profoundly impaired intellectual development. Brain MRI at age 1 year was normal, but cerebellar atrophy was seen on repeat MRI at age 5 years.
614832	Parry et al. (2012) described 7 members of a consanguineous Omani family (AI-46) with hypomineralized amelogenesis imperfecta. Affected individuals had enamel that was yellowish brown with mild partial developmental enamel hypoplasia. The enamel was prone to rapid functional failure and posteruptive volume loss. Dental radiographs showed the absence of contrast between enamel and dentin radiodensity.
614833	Kheradmand Kia et al. (2012) reported a consanguineous Turkish family in which 2 sibs were demonstrated to have diffuse asymmetric polymicrogyria extending from the frontal to the temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes on brain MRI. Other imaging findings included mild ventricular enlargement and thin or short corpus callosum. One patient had mild cerebellar atrophy. The patients were 12 and 14 years old at the time of the report. Both had microcephaly, moderate to severe mental retardation, poor speech, dysarthria, and seizures. One had pyramidal signs. Another family member had moderate mental retardation and seizures, but detailed clinical features were not available. An unrelated 16-year-old boy with diffuse polymicrogyria had microcephaly, severe mental retardation with lack of speech, seizures, and spastic tetraparesis. Two of the patients had normal abdominal ultrasound with situs solitus; 1 had small kidney volume. Shamseldin et al. (2015) described 3 unrelated families segregating microcephaly, short stature, and polymicrogyria without seizures. In the first family, 3 brothers, born to consanguineous parents from Yemen, had intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR), severe short stature, primary microcephaly, and severe intellectual disability. Brain MRI in the oldest brother, aged 12 years, showed few sulcations, bilateral pachygyria, and shallow Sylvian fissures. He also had a single kidney and mild bilateral hearing loss. His 11-year-old brother had a sacral lesion cephalad to the gluteal crease without abnormality of the spinal cord, a right pelvic ectopic kidney, hypospadias, and an undescended testis. His 6-year-old brother had a sacral lesion cephalad to the gluteal crease. In another family, a 5-year-old male, born to consanguineous Saudi Arabian parents, had severe IGUR, severe short stature, primary microcephaly, mildly delayed motor development, noticeable delay in cognitive and speech development, typical microcephaly-related craniofacial dysmorphism, and increased tone. Brain MRI showed simplified gyration, and a 3D computed tomography scan revealed secondary craniosynostosis. In the third family, 2 Canadian brothers were affected. One boy had severe microcephaly, a sloping forehead, a high and broad nasal bridge, multiple joint contractures, and severe failure to thrive. MRI showed severe cerebral and cerebellar hypoplasia, incomplete separation of the cerebral hemispheres, dysgenesis of the corpus callosum, an abnormal ventricular system, a large posterior cyst, multiple areas of lissencephaly and/or pachygyria and polymicrogyria, and multiple subependymal gray matter heterotopias. He died at 2 months of age of a cardiorespiratory arrest. His brother had severe, prenatal-onset growth restriction characterized by microcephaly, and a sloping forehead. His MRI showed microcephaly with gross brain parenchymal abnormalities affecting the cerebral hemispheres and the cerebellum, both of which were extremely small, agenesis of the corpus callosum, reduced sulcation, deformed ventricles, and large cerebrospinal fluid intensity areas occupying the majority of supratentorial compartments bilaterally. He also had cryptorchidism and required urgent surgical intervention for duodenal atresia. He died at 19 days of age. Grandone et al. (2016) reported a brother and sister, born of first-cousin Moroccan parents, with MSSP. At birth, the sibs had severe microcephaly, 28 cm (-5.5 SD) in the boy and 27 cm (-5.3 SD) in the girl. Birth weights and lengths were -1.47 SD and -2.3 SD in the boy and -1.7 SD and -2.9 SD in the girl, respectively. Both sibs presented with diffuse eczema at birth. Facial dysmorphisms included receding forehead and chin, protruding nose, hypotelorism with prominent eyes, slightly upturned palpebral fissures, and simple helices. Both sibs showed severe growth failure and developmental delay. The boy started to walk at age 20 months and speech was absent at his last examination at age 35 months; the girl could sit and crawl at 21 months but could not yet walk and had no speech. Skin remained diffusely pruritic, scaled, and dry in both patients, but dermatitis had begun to improve spontaneously in the boy. Brain MRI showed lissencephaly, periventricular gray matter heterotopia, pons hypoplasia, and a quadrigeminal cistern arachnoid cyst extending into the right occipital region. Wambach et al. (2018) identified a boy with primary microcephaly, simplified gyri, pontocerebellar hypoplasia, contractures, and intractable epilepsy. The boy had a head circumference within normal limits (-1.5 SD) at birth, but by 6 weeks of age, he was severely microcephalic (-4.9 SD). On physical exam, he had microcephaly with metopic ridging, occipital prominence, bilateral microphthalmia, microstomia, microretrognathia, smooth philtrum, relatively large cupped low-set ears, bilateral contractures of knees and ankles, mild camptodactyly with contractures of the interphalangeal joints, and bilateral syndactyly of fourth and fifth fingers and second to fifth toes, microphallus, cryptorchidism, and appendicular hypertonia with normal deep tendon reflexes. Brain MRI showed cerebral hypoplasia with simplified gyral pattern, pontocerebellar hypoplasia, bilateral frontal cortical dysplasia, agenesis of the corpus callosum, thinning of the periventricular white matter, misshapen orbital globes, and optic nerve hypoplasia. Ophthalmologic evaluation showed rudimentary retinal vasculature, hypoplastic optic nerves, and pale optic discs. The patient also had gracile appearing bones with thin ribs on skeletal survey. He had bilateral pyelocaliectasis on renal ultrasound. He had intractable seizures and died at age 4 months of acute, progressive respiratory failure. Wambach et al. (2018) noted that this patient's ophthalmologic and skeletal findings had not previously been reported in patients with MSSP. Cavallin et al. (2018) reported a boy with severe microcephaly, polymicrogyria, and growth restriction, consistent with MSSP. Concerns were initially raised prenatally because of a small head circumference (-4.5 SD) and other abnormalities of the brain. Birth length and weight were also abnormal (-4 SD and -2 SD, respectively). The boy showed microcephaly-related craniofacial dysmorphism, axial hypotonia, and limb spasticity. He began to develop hyperkinesia, with agitation and crying, and severe sleep disorders by the age of 6 months. At last evaluation at age 5 years 9 months, his height and weight were both -4 SD and his head circumference was -10 SD. Development was severely delayed. He had hyperkinetic movement disorders, with self-injurious behavior and motor stereotypies. Neurologic examination showed pyramidal signs. Brain MRI showed microcephaly with extremely reduced frontal lobes, bilateral generalized dysgyria with areas of polymicrogyria, and posterior corpus callosum agenesis. The patient did not develop seizures. EEG showed a rapid alpha-like rhythm with frontotemporal spikes.
614837	Bo-Abbas et al. (2003) described a large Saudi Arabian family in which 2 brothers and a sister in 1 sibship married 2 sisters and a brother in a first-cousin sibship. The family sought medical attention for infertility. Six of the 19 offspring in the 3 sibships (4 men and 2 women), at least 1 from each mating, met the standard diagnostic criteria for idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, including inappropriately low gonadotropin concentrations in the presence of prepubertal concentrations of sex steroids, normal anterior pituitary function, and normal findings on brain imaging. Affected individuals were responsive to exogenous pulsatile gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GNRH; see 152760 and 602352). Tenenbaum-Rakover et al. (2007) studied 5 patients with normosmic HH from 2 unrelated Arab Muslim families from Syria and Israel. Phenotypic analysis revealed variable expressivity within the same family, with affected individuals exhibiting either partial or complete gonadotropic deficiency. Luteinizing hormone (LH; see 152780) pulsatility analysis showed peaks with normal frequency but low amplitude. Repeated GNRH tests performed between 12 and 21 years of age in 1 affected male revealed progressive changes in pituitary response from an early pubertal to an almost full pubertal pattern. Brioude et al. (2013) reported a consanguineous family from Portugal in which a 55-year-old male had gynecomastia and typical hypogonadism, including small intrascrotal testes, near-normal pubic hair, and small penis. He had a normal sense of smell on olfactometry, and pituitary and olfactory bulb MRI and renal ultrasound were normal. He had 2 affected sisters who had complete hypogonadism, with absent breast development and primary amenorrhea but near-normal pubic hair at 30 and 32 years of age, respectively. Both sisters reported a normal sense of smell. The 3 affected individuals had very low serum LH and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH; see 136530) levels, as well as low testosterone and estradiol, respectively. Brioude et al. (2013) also reported a French Caucasian man, born to nonconsanguineous parents, who had no pubertal development at 19 years of age. Examination revealed small intrascrotal testes and small penis, with very low serum levels of testosterone, LH, and FSH, which did not respond to GNRH challenge. Pituitary and olfactory bulb MRI were normal, and olfactometry showed a normal sense of smell. Reevaluation at 27 years of age showed restoration of pulsatile LH secretion as well as testosterone secretion in response to pulsatile GNRH administration. He was azoospermic and underwent combined gonadotropin therapy with successful induction of spermatogenesis; the first 2 pregnancies with his partner ended in early miscarriages, but the third pregnancy resulted in a healthy boy.
614839	Gianetti et al. (2010) reported a female proband with normosmic IHH from a large multiply consanguineous Asian family. She had 3 affected sisters, including 1 who was anosmic, and an unaffected sister. There was evidence for neuroendocrine recovery after discontinuation of sex steroid therapy in the affected individuals: the proband conceived a child without fertility medications but suffered an early pregnancy loss, whereas 1 of her affected sisters conceived spontaneously and carried the pregnancy to term. The third affected sister had regular menstrual cycles but had not conceived, and the unaffected sister had a positive withdrawal bleed to a progesterone challenge but did not cycle spontaneously.
614841	Biben and Gordan (1955) described affected males and females in a family with what they designated 'familial hypogonadotropic eunuchoidism.' Hurxthal (1943) reported a family in which only members of 1 generation were affected. Le Marquand (1954) described 3 affected brothers and 2 affected sisters from a nonconsanguineous family. Ewer (1968) observed an affected brother and 2 sisters from a marriage of second cousins once removed. Another male sib, deceased, was probably affected. Absence of secondary sex characteristics and relatively long extremities were the only abnormal findings. Clomiphene administration had no effect. Toledo et al. (1983) reported 2 brothers and a sister with a hypothalamic form of hypogonadism that the authors designated 'familial idiopathic gonadotropin deficiency' (FIGD). Toledo et al. (1983) concluded that this disorder is due to insufficiency of GNRH secretion and that sensitivity of Leydig cells to human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG; see 118860) is normal in FIGD. They also stated that luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LRH) treatment may be helpful; that associated hypothalamic-pituitary-prolactin dysfunction may be present; and that FIGD and the Kallmann syndrome (see 147950) are distinct entities. To further define the genetic and phenotypic variability of FIGD, Waldstreicher et al. (1996) reviewed detailed family histories of 106 cases of GNRH deficiency with or without anosmia, i.e., Kallmann syndrome or idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH). The great majority of cases appeared to be sporadic, with only 19 probands (18%) having at least 1 family member with GNRH deficiency. However, of the families in which the proband was the sole member affected by Kallmann syndrome or IHH, 9 had individuals with isolated anosmia, and 8 had a strong history of delayed puberty. If these phenotypes were considered as variable expressions of Kallmann syndrome or IHH seen in the proband, then 34% of the cases could be considered familial. The proportion of familial cases that could be attributed to an X-linked mode of inheritance was no greater than 36% in any of these analyses. Waldstreicher et al. (1996) concluded that (1) most cases of GNRH deficiency in humans are sporadic and thus could represent new mutations; (2) the X-linked form is the least common among familial cases of Kallmann syndrome or IHH; (3) defects in at least 2 autosomal genes can cause GNRH deficiency; and (4) associated clinical defects may provide clues to the nature and/or location of these autosomal genes. Bouligand et al. (2009) studied a Romanian brother and sister with normosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The brother, who was referred at 18 years of age because pubertal development had not occurred, exhibited typical signs of complete hypogonadism, with small intrascrotal testes, no pubic hair, and microphallus. His bone age was 13.0 years; he had a normal sense of smell on olfactometry, and had no renal or craniofacial abnormalities. His affected sister, who was evaluated at 17 years of age, also had complete hypogonadism and a normal sense of smell on olfactometry. She had no breast development and no pubic hair, and menarche had not occurred. Pelvic sonography showed a small uterus and 2 small ovaries with no visible follicles. The sibs' karyotypes were 46,XY and 46,XX, respectively. Hormone assays revealed very low plasma testosterone levels in the affected brother and an almost undetectable plasma estradiol level in the affected sister. Both sibs had very low levels of plasma gonadotropin (see 118860) and normal levels of prolactin (176760). They both showed a blunted response to GnRH bolus administration, but otherwise had normal function of the anterior pituitary, thyroid, and adrenal glands, as well as normal levels of ferritin (see 134790) and serum insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF1; 147440) and normal findings on MRI of the pituitary and olfactory bulbs. The sister had basal nonpulsatile luteinizing hormone (LH; see 152780) secretion, but LH pulses, occurring synchronously with GnRH boluses, were detected on day 13 of pulsatile GnRH administration. Pulsatile GnRH administration also resulted in increased circulating levels of estradiol and inhibin-beta (see 147290) and in the recruitment of a single dominant 14-mm follicle seen on ultrasonography. The sibs' unrelated parents reported normal puberty, and the mother had spontaneous regular menses, unassisted conception, and normal pregnancies; there were also 2 unaffected sibs who had normal puberty and normal sex steroid and gonadotropin levels.
614842	Topaloglu et al. (2012) reported a consanguineous Kurdish family in which 4 sisters had normosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The proband presented at 14.9 years of age with absent breast development. She had a bone age of 13 years, and pelvic ultrasonography revealed hypoplastic uterus and ovaries lacking follicles. Bone mineral density testing indicated osteopenia with a Z-score of -2.1 at the femoral neck. A GnRH (152760) stimulation test revealed a blunted response, and LH profiling during sleep showed readings that were all below the lower limit of detection. Two older sisters, aged 30 years and 16 years, respectively, had similar presentations, and a 12-year-old sister had not developed any breast tissue and had a bone age of 10 years. All 4 affected sisters were otherwise healthy, with no dysmorphic features and a normal sense of smell by conventional testing. Their anterior pituitary function was normal apart from the failure to undergo puberty, and there was no evidence of structural lesions on MRI of olfactory bulbs and sulci, hypothalamus, and pituitary regions.
614844	Chaki et al. (2012) reported 2 Turkish sibs, born of consanguineous parents (family F824), with infantile-onset NPHP, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, and situs inversus. Chaki et al. (2012) referred to these patients as having an NPHP-related ciliopathy, despite the presence of cerebellar vermis hypoplasia. Chaki et al. (2012) also reported 2 unrelated patients with Joubert syndrome. One patient had cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, Leber congenital amaurosis (see 204000), and polycystic kidney disease. The other patient had polycystic kidney disease, nephronophthisis, retinal degeneration, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, and perinatal breathing abnormalities. Neither of the Joubert patients had a family history of a similar disorder.
614845	Chaki et al. (2012) reported a Saudi child, born of consanguineous parents, with a variant of nephronophthisis characterized by Leber congenital amaurosis and retinal degeneration resulting in blindness by age 2 years. Affected individuals in 3 additional families were later identified. In 1 family, 2 patients had NPHP at ages 8 and 9 years, respectively, and all had some degree of retinal degeneration, with 1 child being legally blind at age 5 months. One of the children also had seizures and developmental delay. In another family, a severely affected child had NPHP by age 8 years, retinal degeneration, flat electroretinogram, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, facial dysmorphism, polydactyly, abnormal liver function tests, bronchiectasis, and obesity. Two patients in another family reportedly had liver failure.
614846	Levy et al. (2012) reported 4 patients with tetrasomy 15q26 and reviewed the literature describing an additional 10 cases. They compared the tetrasomy phenotype with that of Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (182212) and found that the facial gestalt was different. All 4 cases of Levy et al. (2012) had no evidence of mosaicism. Among all reports there were an equal number of males and females. The ages at which the patients were evaluated ranged from 9 to 32 years for the cases of Levy et al. (2012), and from in utero to 10 years for the reviewed cases. The in utero reports noted in utero growth restriction (IUGR); all other patients had normal or increased birth weight, with normal or increased birth length. All 4 cases reported by Levy et al. (2012) and an additional 4 patients had a typical craniofacial gestalt which included low-set dysplastic ears, hypertelorism and/or telecanthus, downslanting palpebral fissures, coarse asymmetric facies, prominent nose with broad nasal root, and a prominent chin. All patients in whom evaluation was possible had developmental delay. The 4 patients reported by Levy et al. (2012) and the majority of the others had craniosynostosis and/or skull deformity. Most had micro/retrognathia. Central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities were present in 6 of 7 in whom evaluation was performed and included hydrocephalus, Dandy-Walker malformation, syrinx, and brain atrophy. None had hernia. The majority had arachnodactyly and/or camptodactyly/contractures. Only 1 patient had a pectus abnormality. None of those reported by Levy et al. (2012), but 3 of the others, had a congenital heart defect. All 4 of the patients reported by Levy et al. (2012) but only 1 of the others had kyphosis/scoliosis. The vast majority had renal anomalies including horseshoe kidneys, obstructive uropathy, and hydronephrosis; 1 patient had bilateral Wilms tumor. Levy et al. (2012) concluded that the hallmark features of tetrasomy 15q26 include severe developmental delay, craniosynostosis, marfanoid habitus, coarse asymmetric facies, prominent nose with broad nasal root, and prominent chin. Renal anomalies strongly implicate aneusomy of distal 15q, but may be absent if the breakpoint lies distal to 15q25.3. Levy et al. (2012) noted clinical similarity between tetrasomy 15q26, Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome, and Loeys-Dietz syndrome (see 609192) and recommended that all 3 of these syndromes be included in the differential diagnosis.
614847	Suls et al. (2009) identified heterozygous mutations in the SLC2A1 gene in 4 (12%) of 34 patients with early-onset absence epilepsy before age 4 years. CSF glucose levels were not available from any of the patients. One of the patients had no additional abnormalities and normal development. However, clinical review of these patients after diagnosis showed that 3 had mild to moderate mental retardation, 2 had mild ataxia, and 1 had myoclonus and exercise-induced paroxysmal dyskinesia. None had microcephaly. Two patients inherited missense mutations from parents with later-onset absence epilepsy. Mullen et al. (2010) reported significant intrafamilial clinical variability in 2 unrelated families with SLC2A1 mutations: 1 with 9 mutation carriers spanning 2 generations and the other with 6 mutation carriers spanning 2 generations. Of 15 patients with SLC2A1 mutations, 12 had epilepsy, most commonly absence epilepsy, with onset between ages 3 and 34 years. Eight patients had idiopathic generalized epilepsies with absence seizures, 2 had myoclonic-astatic epilepsy, and 2 had focal epilepsy. Seven patients had subtle paroxysmal exertional dyskinesia as the only manifestation, and 2 mutation carriers were unaffected. Only 3 of 15 patients had mild intellectual disabilities. Mullen et al. (2010) emphasized the phenotypic overlap with common forms of idiopathic generalized epilepsy. Striano et al. (2012) reported a large Italian family in which 9 individuals spanning 3 generations had various forms of epilepsy. The age at seizure onset ranged from early childhood to 23 years. All had generalized seizures, mainly typical absence seizures, and EEG showed regular, symmetric discharges of 3 to 3.5 Hz spike wave complexes. Seizures typically remitted 2 to 5 years after onset, although 1 patient later developed juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Most showed a favorable response to pharmacologic treatment. None of the patients had other neurologic manifestations, including movement disorders. In a European population-based study of epilepsy types associated with GLUT1, Larsen et al. (2015) identified SLC2A1 mutations in 5 (10%) of 50 patients with absence epilepsy and in 1 (2.7%) of 37 patients from a group with epilepsies, intellectual disability, and/or movement disorders. Five mutations occurred de novo and 1 was inherited from an affected mother. Five patients had absence epilepsy, including 1 with epilepsy with myoclonic absences, and 1 had focal epilepsy. Seizure onset ranged from 6 weeks to 5 years of age, and 5 of the 6 patients had mild to moderate intellectual disability. Four patients became seizure-free on a ketogenic diet. SLC2A1 mutations were not found in 120 patients with myoclonic astatic epilepsy. The report confirmed the association between SLC2A1 mutations and early-onset absence epilepsy.
614849	Perez de Diego et al. (2010) described an 18-year-old French girl, born of unrelated parents, who presented at 4 years of age with persistent high fever followed by diarrhea, epilepsy, and aphasia. Cerebrospinal fluid contained herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1, consistent with HSE. She had had chicken pox (varicella-zoster virus, VZV) 1 to 2 months before HSE. Serologic studies were positive for other dsDNA viruses, including EBV, VZV, and HSV-2. The acute HSE episode responded well to 3 weeks of intravenous acyclovir treatment. At age 18 years she was healthy, had no further episodes of severe infection, and showed normal resistance to other infectious diseases, including viral diseases. Liew et al. (2022) reported a 51-year-old woman of Asian descent with a 6-year history of recurrent Mycobacterium abscessus pulmonary infections with progressive severe cavitating bronchiectasis eventually necessitating lobectomy. Immunologic work-up showed normal lymphocyte numbers, normal immunoglobulins, and absence of autoantibodies. Functional studies of patient immune cells showed reduced TNFA (191160) and IL6 responses to stimulation with poly I:C and LPS. Cytokine response to M. abscessus was markedly decreased. She was lost to follow-up for several years, but presented again with progression of disease and persistent M. abscessus infection. Her hospitalization was complicated by pneumothorax and superimposed Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Aspergillus pneumonia, which led to her death.
614850	Sancho-Shimizu et al. (2011) reported 2 unrelated patients from Saudi Arabia and Europe with childhood-onset HSE resulting from autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant TRIF deficiency. Both patients presented at around 2 years of age with persistent high fever, and their cerebrospinal fluid contained herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1. Both patients responded well to different antiviral treatments. Overall, the clinical phenotypes of these 2 patients were remarkably similar to those observed in patients with HSE resulting from UNC93B1 deficiency (610551), TLR3 deficiency (613002), or TRAF3 deficiency (614849). Mork et al. (2015) reported 2 unrelated men (P5 and P6) who developed HSE after age 60 years. Neither patient had suffered from any other severe viral infections, although P6 experienced a severe genital herpes eruption a few days prior to the HSE episode, which was caused by HSV-2. The infection in P5 was due to HSV-1. Additional clinical details were not provided.
614851	Dauber et al. (2012) reported 2 sisters, 22 years and 18 years of age, who had severe pre- and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, and developmental delay. Both were given growth hormone but had suboptimal response, with resultant severe short stature as adults (-7.35 SD and -8.63 SD). In their late teens, both sisters had primary amenorrhea, Tanner 1 breast development, and Tanner 5 pubic hair, with normal LH and FSH levels and borderline low serum estradiol; pelvic ultrasound revealed small to relatively normal ovarian volume and a prepubertal uterus, and both were started on estrogen replacement therapy. Thyroid function tests showed borderline central hypothyroidism, and with worsening obesity in the sisters, they were started on thyroid hormone therapy. Other medical problems common to both sibs included congenital bilateral hip dysplasia, seizures that developed in infancy and were controlled by medication, and severe microcephaly (-6.8 SD and -6.7 SD) with severe mental retardation (preschool level). MRI of the brain at 20 years of age in the older sister showed cerebral hemispheres affected more severely than the cerebellum, with a slightly immature sulcation pattern, but there were no gross malformations.
614852	Guernsey et al. (2010) reported 3 unrelated patients from eastern Canada with primary microcephaly. In all families, both parents were of Acadian descent. All patients had head circumferences between 5 and 7 standard deviations below the mean, and none had other dysmorphic features. In infancy, all were noted to have fast, jerky movements, as well as mirror movements. There was mild psychomotor delay. The patients were friendly, happy, socially aware, and attended school, although there were some behavioral disorders, such as impulsivity, aggression, and tantrums. One had tics, and another had obsessive-compulsive traits. Psychologic testing of 1 patient showed moderate cognitive impairment. None had epilepsy. Brain MRI of 1 patient showed markedly reduced brain size and simplified gyral pattern. Sajid Hussain et al. (2013) reported 2 members of a consanguineous Pakistani family with severe microcephaly (-11 to -13 SD) at the ages of 10 to 24 years. The patients could speak complete sentences and had self-care skills, but showed self-injurious behaviors.
614856	Munns et al. (2004) reported 3 children from unrelated nonconsanguineous French Canadian families who had recurrent fractures, primarily of the lower limbs (94%), that started with weight bearing. All fractures, which were documented radiologically, resulted from minimal or no trauma; fracture repair was normal. Other than a fracture of the twelfth thoracic vertebra in 1 patient, there were no vertebral compression fractures or indicators of scoliosis on spine x-rays. Height was normal in 2 of the patients and slightly below the reference range in 1. All had normal dentition, white sclerae, and normal joint laxity. Radiography showed increased metaphyseal trabeculation with normal to increased cortical thickness. Areal and volumetric bone mineral density did not show any major alteration. Peripheral quantitative CT of the radius in 1 patient showed elevated cortical thickness and elevated total and trabecular volumetric bone mineral density. Qualitative histology of iliac bone biopsy specimens showed a paucity of the birefringent pattern of normal lamellar bone. Quantitative histomorphometric analysis demonstrated osteomalacia with a prolonged mineralization lag time in the presence of a decreased mineral apposition rate. There was no biochemical evidence of abnormal calcium or phosphate metabolism, and heteroduplex screening for type I collagen variants was negative. Munns et al. (2004) concluded that this phenotype represents a novel bone fragility disorder of moderate severity that tends to cause fracture in the lower extremities and is associated with the accumulation of osteoid due to an intrinsic mineralization defect. Martinez-Glez et al. (2012) described a sister and brother, offspring of first-cousin Egyptian parents, with autosomal recessive OI. The 15-year-old female proband had a triangular face, broad forehead, wide palpebral fissures, long eyelashes, faint blue sclerae, long philtrum, thin lips, and prominent ears. Gross motor development was delayed and she was not able to stand unsupported. No dentinogenesis imperfecta was present. Her thorax was relatively large with increased anteroposterior and transverse diameters compressing the abdomen. She had a large umbilical hernia with abdominal content, generalized hypotonia, muscle wasting, and nocturnal enuresis. Skeletal examination showed severe generalized deformities of all bones with consistent pain on touch, including deformed clavicles; bilateral bowed angulated humerus, radius, and ulna; arachnodactyly; and hyperextensibility of elbow, wrist, and interphalangeal joints. Lower limbs showed bowing of femora, severely angulated deformed leg bones and limited movements of the knee joints. She also had kyphoscoliosis and pectus carinatum. Radiologic examination revealed deformed long bones with multiple fractures and callus formation, lack of bone modeling with wide distal metaphyses of femora, serpentine thin tibiae and fibulae in addition to S-curve scoliosis of thoracic and lumbar spine with platyspondyly, and generalized decreased bone density. Skull X-ray showed wormian bones. Anthropometric measurements at 13 years of age were below normal for weight (-3.8 SD), length (-11.5 SD) and head circumference (-3.0 SD). Bone densitometry (DEXA) at 15 years revealed borderline osteoporosis at the hip and spine (Z-score -2.22 and -2.13, respectively). Her 5-year-old brother had a similar phenotype. Audiologic and cardiovascular examinations of both patients were unremarkable. Serum calcium and phosphate were normal, whereas alkaline phosphatase levels were slightly high. Both patients were diagnosed as having Sillence type III, and cyclic IV bisphosphonate injections were started. Valencia et al. (2014) reported a 3-year-old Pakistani boy from a consanguineous family who was first diagnosed with a dislocated spiral femur fracture at 4 months of age. Skeletal survey showed older fractures of the ribs, but no bowing or shortening of the extremities and no wormian bones. By 2 years of age, he had 25 radiologically verified fractures, 11 of the extremities and 14 of the ribs. He had white sclerae, normal teeth and skin, and no dysmorphic features. Repeated whole-body and spine DEXA scans showed bone density in the normal range, and alkaline phosphatase and phosphate levels were normal, with plasma calcium in the upper normal range. Fahiminiya et al. (2015) studied 4 unrelated patients of French Canadian origin with mild to moderate bone fragility, 2 of whom had been previously studied by Munns et al. (2004). All had normal height and weight at presentation, normal dentition, and white sclerae. Aside from fracture episodes, mobility was not impaired, and fractures healed normally. Two of the patients had vertebral compression fractures. Biochemical parameters of bone and mineral metabolism were normal at baseline. Peripheral quantitative CT showed that all individuals had elevated volumetric cortical bone mineral density. Analysis of iliac bone samples indicated that onset of mineralization at bone formation sites was delayed but that the mineralized matrix was hypermineralized. Cho et al. (2015) reported a 1.75-year-old Korean girl who was born with a fractured left humerus as well as right clubfoot, umbilical hernia, and bilateral simian creases. At 8 months of age, she presented with a left femur fracture, and subsequently sustained more than 10 fractures per year of the upper and lower limbs. Examination at 12 months of age showed white sclerae as well as normal teeth and skin; the patient had no dysmorphic features. She had generalized hypotonia, muscle wasting, short stature, and hyperextensibility of the elbow, wrist, and interphalangeal joints. Mental development appeared normal, but motor development was delayed, and she was unable to sit unsupported. Skeletal survey showed multifocal fractures of the humerus, femur, and tibia, as well as bilateral radial head dislocation with distal bowing of the radius and ulna; the latter bones also exhibited a peculiar shape, with eccentric curvature and narrowing of the distal ulna. She had mild scoliosis, but no vertebral fracture was seen. Skull radiographs at 20 months of age showed wormian bones and a wide open anterior fontanel.
614857	Coelho et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated patients with methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria. Both patients showed abnormalities soon after birth. One patient, of North American origin, had respiratory distress, hypotonia, lethargy, poor feeding, periodic breathing, and episodes of posturing in the neonatal period. There was evidence of bone marrow suppression requiring red blood cell and platelet transfusion. The second child, of European origin, had increased temperature and tachypnea at birth. The patient had feeding difficulties, poor growth, hypotonia, and developmental delay. Some dysmorphic features were also present, including hypertelorism, micrognathia, widely spaced nipples, bell-shaped thorax, horizontal ribs, and short extremities. He also had some cardiac abnormalities, including atrial septal defect, coarctation of the aorta, enlarged right ventricle, and pulmonary hypertension. The patient had an episode of neutropenia later in childhood. Studies of cultured fibroblasts in both patients showed increased cobalamin uptake, but poor cobalamin utility, as manifest by virtually absent synthesis of AdoCbl and MeCbl and decreased function of MUT and MTR. There was cellular accumulation of free cbl, similar to that observed in cblF (277380). Somatic cell complementation studies showed that both patients had the same genetic defect; mutations in the LMBRD1 gene (612625) were not found.
614859	Konkol'ova et al. (2015) described a patient with Zellweger syndrome, the son of healthy, nonconsanguineous Caucasian parents. The patient was born by spontaneous delivery at 39 weeks' gestation and had Apgar scores of 4 and 8, with perinatal asphyxia. Dysmorphic features included high forehead, flat face, broad nasal bridge, low-set ears, wide open anterior fontanel, and varus deformity of the left leg. Seizures first occurred on the second day of life. Hypotonia and areflexia were progressive. Abdominal ultrasound revealed polycystic kidneys and a single cyst in the liver. EEG was normal. Ultrasound of the central nervous system disclosed mild dilatation of the ventricular system occipitally. During an enterovirus infection, seizures, bradycardia, and thermolability progressed. The patient died at age 23 days of cardiorespiratory failure.
614861	Delmaghani et al. (2012) studied a 6-generation consanguineous Iranian family in which 3 brothers, born of first-cousin parents, had nonsyndromic prelingual sensorineural deafness. The affected sibs, aged 20 to 34 years, had severely impaired language acquisition; pure-tone audiometry showed flat audiograms, characteristic of profound hearing impairment. No auditory brain response (ABR) could be recorded even in response to 100-dB sound stimulation in any of the affected brothers, indicating defects of the cochlea or the auditory nerve. In addition, ipsilateral stapedial reflexes were absent, and transient-evoked otoacoustic emissions to probe the activity of outer hair cells could not be detected.
614862	Fukuda et al. (1996) described a patient with Zellweger syndrome of complementation group C, a Japanese girl of nonconsanguineous parents. In the neonatal period she showed severe asphyxia, profound hypotonia, and clonic convulsions. Cranial dysmorphism including low nasal bridge, hypertelorism, epicanthus inversus, and upslanting palpebral fissures, as well as hepatomegaly, were present. X-rays showed abnormal calcific stippling of both patellae. Serum VLCFAs were elevated. Immunohistochemical staining of cultured fibroblasts indicated absence of peroxisomes. The patient died of respiratory failure at 7 months.
614863	Najmabadi et al. (2011) studied 5 sibs (family M331) with moderate intellectual disability, retinitis pigmentosa, hearing loss, and ataxia. Their parents, who were second cousins, had 6 healthy children. Falkenberg et al. (2017) studied 7 unrelated patients and 1 half brother who all exhibited characteristic features of a Zellweger spectrum disorder. Most had visual impairment and/or sensorineural hearing loss, and liver dysfunction was also frequently noted. One patient had adrenal insufficiency and 1 patient had recurrent calcium oxalate kidney stones. All affected individuals showed neurologic involvement, including profound hypotonia, gait abnormalities, developmental delay, and neuropathy, as well as white matter abnormalities on brain MRI. Biochemical analysis revealed aberrant peroxisomal metabolite levels in patient blood and fibroblasts, and patient fibroblasts showed an import defect of peroxisomal matrix proteins. The clinical course was progressive, without a clear episode of rapid deterioration. Four patients died between 8 and 20 years of age, whereas 4 patients were still alive and in their first decade of life at the time of the study. Guissart et al. (2016) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Turkish parents (family C), with early-onset cerebellar ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa. Both had normal birth and normal initial development, but showed delayed walking at 3 years of age and ataxic gait. Clinical examination showed cerebellar ataxia, dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesis, intention tremor, and dysarthria. Brain imaging showed mild alteration of cerebellar white matter, but no cerebellar atrophy. Nerve conduction studies showed a demyelinating peripheral motor neuropathy with reduced nerve conduction velocities. The older sister had speech delay, brisk reflexes, and extensor plantar responses. She was wheelchair-bound at 16 years of age and died at age 17. The 24-year-old brother had spasticity and left renal stone.
614866	Shimozawa et al. (1992) studied a Japanese girl (M.M.), aged 8 months, with typical clinical findings of Zellweger syndrome as well as accumulation of very long chain fatty acids in serum, absence of liver homogenates in all 3 peroxisomal beta-oxidation enzymes, absent peroxisomes in skin fibroblasts, and, at autopsy, macrogyria and polymicrogyria in the brain, hepatosplenomegaly, and many small cysts in the renal cortices bilaterally.
614867	Shimozawa et al. (1999) studied a Welsh female with IRD who presented at the age of 1 year with delayed milestones and joint laxity. Later, retinitis pigmentosa manifested and biochemical investigation showed accumulation of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) and phytanic acid and an abnormal bile acid profile. The activities of dihydroxyacetone phosphate acyltransferase (DHAP-AT) were reduced in platelets and fibroblasts. The patient died at 3 years of age following an episode of bronchiolitis. Mandel et al. (1994) reported 2 brothers, aged 5 and 9 years, with neurodegenerative symptoms after the first year of life. They were born to consanguineous Israeli Arab parents. Both sibs were found to have elevated levels of plasma very long chain fatty acids, pipecolic and phytanic acids, and abnormal bile acid intermediates, suggesting a generalized peroxisome deficiency disorder. Peroxisomes were absent in 90% of hepatocytes, but normal peroxisomal functions were found in fibroblasts. Gootjes et al. (2004) reported further on the older brother. His development was described as normal in infancy, but by the age of 22 months, he had hypotonia, could not walk unassisted, and had cerebellar and vermian atrophy on MRI. The patient continued to deteriorate and died from pneumonia at age 13. Sevin et al. (2011) reported 2 brothers, born of unrelated parents, who developed isolated progressive cerebellar ataxia at ages 3.5 and 18 years, respectively. The younger brother developed mild dysarthria at age 2.5 years and gait disturbances at age 3.5 years. He had a broad-based gait, but was able to run and climb stairs at age 7. The symptoms worsened at age 9: he was unable to run, had difficulty writing, and showed tremor, nystagmus, slow saccades, and hyporeflexia. Cognition was reported as normal. The older brother developed cerebellar signs with ataxia, dysmetria, dysarthria, hyporeflexia, and slow saccades with oculomotor apraxia at age 18 years. Brain imaging in both patients showed cerebellar atrophy. Laboratory studies showed increased phytanic and pristanic acid and moderately increased bile acid intermediates (DHCA and THCA). Very long-chain fatty acids were near normal, and pipecolic acid and plasmalogen synthesis were normal. These findings were consistent with a mild peroxisomal disorder. Mignarri et al. (2012) reported a 51-year-old Italian man with a mild form of PBD5B, who had experienced childhood onset of slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia characterized by increased falls and unsteady walking at age 3 years. Clinical features as an adult included gait ataxia, gaze-evoked nystagmus, hypoacusis, dysarthria, dysmetria, areflexia, and pes cavus. Electrophysiologic studies showed a severe axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Cognition was intact. Brain imaging showed cerebellar and pontine atrophy without signal abnormalities. Laboratory studies showed increased very long chain fatty acids, increased pristanic and phytanic acid, and increased bile acid intermediates, consistent with a mild peroxisomal defect.
614868	Abdollahpour et al. (2012) reported 3 patients, a brother and sister and their niece, from a consanguineous Iranian family who presented with a primary immunodeficiency resulting in bacterial and viral infections, mucocutaneous candidiasis, cutaneous warts, and recurrent skin abscesses. Two sibs of the brother and sister died in their first year of life due to septicemia. All patients showed continuous or intermittent neutropenia, with normal maturation of neutrophils in bone marrow. Immunologic investigation revealed lymphopenia with a paucity of T and B cells in the brother and sister. Their niece, who had episodes of lymphopenia in her records, had low CD4 (186940)-positive T cells and B cells but elevated CD8 (see 186910)-positive T cells, possibly due to generalized Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated lymphadenopathy. Lymph node biopsy in this patient showed an EBV-associated B-lymphoproliferative disorder that phenotypically resembled lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. Systematic echocardiography identified structural cardiac abnormalities, including atrial septal defect type II and patent foramen ovale in the sister and brother, respectively, and patent foramen ovale associated with mitral, tricuspid, and pulmonary insufficiency in their niece. These cardiac aberrations had not caused clinical symptoms. Nehme et al. (2012) investigated 4 patients with combined immunodeficiency from 2 unrelated consanguineous Turkish families who presented with recurrent bacterial and viral infections, autoimmune manifestations, dermatitis, hypergammaglobulinemia G and A, and contrasting defective antibody responses. The affected child from 1 family was successfully treated for EBV-positive Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma at age 5 years. Two of the 3 affected children from the second family, who had developed EBV-associated B-cell lymphoproliferative syndrome and autoimmune hemolytic anemia with persistent EBV viremia, respectively, died following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) due to graft-versus-host disease and persistent infections. HSCT at the age of 4 years apparently cured the immunodeficiency in the third affected child from this family. This patient was found to have tricuspid valve insufficiency and moderate right ventricular hypertrophy at the age of 5 years.
614869	Ahmed et al. (2009) reported a large consanguineous Pakistani family (PKDF117) with Usher syndrome type I. Affected individuals had congenital profound sensorineural hearing loss, delayed onset of independent ambulation consistent with vestibular dysfunction, and variable severity of retinitis pigmentosa related to age.
614870	Nakai et al. (1995) described findings on MRI of the brain from a patient whose cells were shown to belong to complementation group B (complementation group 7 in the American nomenclature). The MRI showed marked colpocephaly, pachygyria in the perisylvian regions, and mild impairment of myelination in the pachygyric area. The girl required ventilatory support from age 5 months and she died at age 7 months. Krause et al. (2006) described a Turkish male infant (PBD-HR7) with rapidly progressive Zellweger syndrome. The infant had hypotonia, seizures, renal cysts, and dysmorphic features, including a broad nasal bridge, external ear deformity, and 'sickle foot.' He died at 4 days of age.
614871	Clayton et al. (1996) reported an 8-year-old girl who presented with progressive ataxia, tremor, and dysarthria at 3.5 years of age after normal early development. She had no other neurologic abnormalities. Brain imaging showed cerebellar atrophy and focal white matter lesions in the cerebral hemispheres. Laboratory studies showed a mild increase in liver enzymes, increased phytanic and pristanic acids, and increases in the bile acid intermediates THCA and DHCA, consistent with a peroxisomal disorder. However, beta-oxidation of branched-chain fatty acids was normal. Treatment with a low-phytanic acid diet resulted in normalization of the biochemical parameters and arrested the progression of ataxia. Steinberg et al. (2009) reported follow-up of the patient (PBD687) reported by Clayton et al. (1996). At age 17 years, she had slow speech and difficulty with handwriting, spelling, and calculations. She did not have nystagmus, but showed breakdown of pursuits and dysmetric saccades. She had marked ataxia, mild hypotonia, and a history of delayed menarche. Liver function was normal. Laboratory studies showed increased plasma pipecolic acid, DHCA, and THCA, but fibroblasts did not show any defects in peroxisome metabolism or assembly, even at higher temperatures. Regal et al. (2010) reported 2 unrelated patients who presented around age 5 to 6 years with slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria, and a sensorimotor axonal neuropathy. Clinical features included gait ataxia, limb ataxia, impaired smooth pursuit, distal sensory impairment, and hypo- or areflexia in the lower limbs. Neither patient had mental retardation. Brain imaging showed cerebellar atrophy. Laboratory studies showed increased phytanic, pristanic, and pipecolic acids as well as increased bile acid intermediates. One patient had mildly abnormal liver function tests. Very long-chain fatty acids were normal. Fibroblasts from 1 patient showed peroxisomal mosaicism, with 20% of fibroblasts lacking normal peroxisomes. Regal et al. (2010) emphasized the mild phenotype in these patients.
614872	Al-Sayed et al. (2007) described a child with Zellweger syndrome who was one of 4 affected sibs. He had typical features of Zellweger syndrome including high forehead, flat face, large anterior and posterior fontanels, flat occiput, posteriorly rotated and low-set ears, nystagmus, bilateral lenticular cataract, jaundice, high-arched palate, long philtrum, bilateral talipes equinovarus, and severe hypotonia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed bilateral cortical polymicrogyria. Very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) were elevated. The child died at 4 months of age from cardiorespiratory arrest after a chest infection. The parents had sought preimplantation genetic analysis with intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), which resulted in the birth of a healthy girl.
614874	Lie et al. (2010) reported 9 Amish patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia. Eight of the 9 had neonatal respiratory distress and all had persistent nasal congestion and coughing. Other clinical findings included chronic rhinosinusitis and pneumonia. Only 1 had recurrent otitis media. Five of the 9 patients had laterality defects. Spirometry showed decreased forced vital capacity, and nasal nitric oxide measurements were extremely low. Ciliary ultrastructural analysis showed absent outer dynein arms. Horani et al. (2012) provided follow-up of the 9 Amish patients reported by Lie et al. (2010). Affected individuals presented in early infancy with recurrent sinopulmonary infections resulting in progressive respiratory distress. About half of patients had situs inversus, and males were infertile. Electron microscopy showed absent outer dynein arms and most outer doublets lacked inner dynein arms, suggesting a combined defect. Cultured nasal epithelial cells from a patient showed markedly lower levels of HEATR2 compared to controls, and videomicroscopy showed that patient nasal epithelial cells had virtually immotile cilia.
614876	Honsho et al. (1998) analyzed a cell line (GM06231) from a patient with Zellweger syndrome of complementation group D obtained from the NIGMS Human Genetic Mutant Cell Repository. The catalog of the NIGMS Repository stated that the patient (cell line GM06231) was a 1-month-old white female with consanguineous parents, a similarly affected sib, muscle hypotonia, craniofacial dysmorphia, ventricular septal defect, glossoptosis, cataracts, hepatomegaly with jaundice and elevated SGOT and SGPT, and elevated CSF protein. Shimozawa et al. (2002) stated that the 2 complementation group D patients analyzed for mutations by them had typical features of Zellweger syndrome.
614877	Ebberink et al. (2010) studied 6 patients, including 1 previously reported by Pineda et al. (1999), with a relatively mild peroxisome biogenesis disorder. Two sibs presented between age 1 and 2 years with delayed walking and frequent falls after normal initial development. The disorder was progressive and was characterized by lower limb spasticity and ataxia resulting in wheelchair dependence in the first decade. Other features included optic atrophy, cataracts, dysarthria, dysphagia, constipation, and a peripheral demyelinating motor and sensory neuropathy. Brain imaging showed progressive white matter abnormalities involving many brain regions. Cognition was relatively preserved. Studies of skin fibroblasts showed that peroxisomes were markedly enlarged in size and reduced in number compared to controls. However, biochemical studies showed only mild abnormalities, such as increased very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA), increased bile acid intermediates, and increased branched chain fatty acids (only found in 1 sib). Phytanic acid alpha-oxidation, pristanic acid beta-oxidation, and red cell plasmalogen were normal. Peroxisomal enzymes were normal, and the peroxisomes were import-competent. The other patients displayed similar symptoms.
614878	Zhou et al. (2012) reported a father and daughter with a systemic autoinflammatory disorder characterized by early-onset recurrent blistering skin lesions, nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis with respiratory bronchiolitis (NSIP), arthralgia, eye inflammation, enterocolitis, cellulitis, and recurrent sinopulmonary infections. Both individuals developed a full-body epidermolysis bullosa-like eruption in infancy, but this later evolved to recurrent erythematous plaques and vesiculopustular lesions that worsened with heat and sun exposure. Biopsy of open skin lesions revealed a dense infiltrate of neutrophils, eosinophils, histiocytes, and lymphocytes. In addition, the daughter developed corneal blisters at age 6 months and ulcerative colitis at age 2 years. Laboratory studies showed a decrease in circulating IgM and IgA antibodies, decreased numbers of class-switched memory B cells, and decreased numbers of NK T cells. Neither patient had autoantibodies. The symptoms were partially responsive to an IL1 (147760) inhibitor and high-dose corticosteroids. Neves et al. (2018) reported an 11-year-old girl, born of nonconsanguineous Portuguese parents, who presented with a severe vesiculopustular rash in the first week of life. At age 2 months, she was diagnosed with inflammatory bowel disease. She continued to have recurrent episodes of blistering rash and presented with chest infections. At the age of 3 years, she started to have recurrent eye inflammation that was associated with ocular hypertension. She then had more frequent recurrent infections, including acute otitis media, chronic sinusitis, and pneumonia. Cutis laxa was evident from the age of 6 years, and progressive sensorineural deafness was diagnosed at age 7. Immunologic analysis at age 7 revealed low IgM and IgA, absent responses to protein antigens, and low B cells, with almost absent class-switched memory B cells. T-cell proliferation responses were preserved. The disease was only partially responsive to treatment, including IL1 blockers.
614879	Moser et al. (1995) reported 3 patients with PBD CG11 who had unusually mild clinical and biochemical manifestations. Two sisters had congenital cataracts but no dysmorphic features and normal limbs. The older sister had normal cognitive function, and the younger was mentally retarded, functioning at 5 years of age at an 18-month to 2-year-old level. A moderate elevation of levels of phytanic acid in plasma and intermediate reductions in erythrocyte plasmalogen levels and fibroblast plasmalogen synthesis pointed to peroxisome dysfunction. In fibroblasts, the reduced capacity to oxidize phytanic acid and the moderate reduction in plasmalogen synthesis, in combination with normal VLCFA levels, suggested a relationship to RCDP that was confirmed by complementation studies. The third patient, a 55-year-old Norwegian man, had retinitis pigmentosa, polyneuropathy, ichthyosis, hearing loss, and normal cognitive function at age 9 years. He was diagnosed with classic Refsum disease (266500) by Professor Sigvald Refsum. When he was 26 years of age, his plasma phytanic acid levels were elevated and he was given a phytanic acid-restricted diet. At age 53 his neurologic disability had worsened and he had also developed cardiomyopathy. He had not adhered to the diet, but plasma phytanic acid levels were only slightly increased. Except for a reduction in the capacity to oxidize phytanic acid, peroxisomal functions in fibroblasts were normal. Barth et al. (1996) studied a 9-year-old girl with cataracts and atypical bone dysplasia. Neurologic findings were mild compared to classic RCDP. Plasma phytanic acid was normal. Results of de novo plasmalogen synthesis and phytanic acid oxidation studied in cultured skin fibroblasts were intermediate between normal controls and classic RCDP. Peroxisomal thiolase was present only in the unprocessed 44-kD protein. That this was a mild variant of classic RCDP was supported further by complementation studies. Earlier studies had shown that fibroblasts from all RCDP patients belong to a single complementation group. Fibroblasts from this patient likewise fell into this complementation group. The patient had been considered normal until 3 months of age when her mother noticed that her legs could not be straightened. Flexion contractures of the hips, elbows, and knees were found at 1 year. Bilateral cataracts necessitated lens extraction at 2 years. She did not walk independently until 8 years of age. Speech development and adaptive behavior at 8 years represented a mental age between 1 and 2 years. Review of x-ray findings of the knees at the age of 10 months showed irregular calcific stippling outlining the patellas. This stippling had disappeared on repeat examination at 5 years. The length of the humeri and femora were very short with the shortness of the femora not explained by the dysplasia of the hips. Braverman et al. (2002) reported 5 patients with PEX7 mutations and atypically mild phenotypes. One, aged 58 years (PBD147), had a phenotype indistinguishable from that of classic Refsum disease. The second had bilateral cataracts but otherwise normal exams. The third presented in infancy with moderate developmental delay, epiphyseal irregularities on skeletal x-rays, and poor growth. He developed features of adult Refsum disease at age 12 years. The fourth patient at the age of 3 years had moderate mental impairment, cataracts, and chondrodysplasia punctata but is without rhizomelia or growth failure. The fifth patient, age 9 years, had cataracts, chondrodysplasia, and severe mental deficiency but no rhizomelia or growth failure. Horn et al. (2007) reported follow-up of a man with Refsum disease (PBD147 in the report of Braverman et al. (2002)) originally diagnosed by Dr. Refsum in 1948 and reported again by Eldjarn et al. (1966). He presented at age 7 years with all of the classic clinical features, including progressive retinopathy with loss of night vision and concentric narrowing of the visual fields. Pupils were small and irregular in shape and showed impaired response to light stimulation. He had neurogenic hearing loss and anosmia. A chronic sensorimotor neuropathy manifest as lower limb atrophy, lack of distal reflexes, and impaired distal sensation. Subcutaneous nerves were thickened and palpable. There was a history of ichthyosis, and he had hammertoe deformity. Long-term dietary restriction of phytanic acid intake stabilized his progressive loss of vision and hearing. However, at age 40, he developed progressive cardiac disease with arrhythmias and heart failure necessitating cardiac transplant at age 58. Van den Brink et al. (2003) reported 2 probands with Refsum disease. The first proband originated from a family comprising 8 sibs and was 1 of 3 affected. He became ataxic at age 12 years and on examination at age 19 years had retinitis pigmentosa, with limited ocular fields, absence of night blindness, and normal ERG. Other features included anosmia, short fifth metacarpal and palmar ichthyosis, pes cavus, musculature weakness, and nerve hypertrophy, which was confirmed by sural nerve biopsy. His sister presented at age 20 years with postpartum ataxia and numbness in her fingers and toes. She had profound retinitis pigmentosa, abnormal ERG, anosmia, sensory and motor dysfunction with nerve hypertrophy, and mild pes cavus. The third affected sib, a brother, had mild retinitis pigmentosa and anosmia, but no other signs on screening at age 24 years. The second proband originated from a family comprising 8 sibs with 2 living affected members. Although born with bilateral cataracts, she presented to a neurology clinic at age 20 years with polyneuritis and onset of ataxia at age 19 years. She had bilateral short fifth metacarpals and metatarsals, and mild retinitis pigmentosa. Her brother presented at age 34 years with mild ataxia and mild retinitis pigmentosa but no night blindness, obvious anosmia, or deafness. Neither patient had any episodes of ichthyosis or signs of deafness. One other male sib died of supposed poliomyelitis with symptoms of weakness and ataxia at age 12 years. Yu et al. (2013) reported 3 children from a consanguineous Pakistani family who were diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability and who carried a homozygous mutation in the PEX7 gene. These children were not dysmorphic and did not exhibit skeletal dysplasia, but 2 had cataracts, and 2 had epilepsy. Yu et al. (2013) recontacted 2 sibs reported by Braverman et al. (2002) with mild peroxisome biogenesis disorder 9B; one was originally described as intellectually disabled and the other as neurotypical. Both had cataracts and the intellectually disabled sib had seizures. Review of clinical records and reexamination revealed that the first child had been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder and the second with severe ADHD, providing additional examples of the range of clinical expressivity of mild mutations in PEX7.
614881	Blumen et al. (2012) reported 3 adult sibs, born of Moroccan Jewish Israeli parents, with distal muscle weakness. The parents' consanguinity was probable, but not certain. The proband presented at age 18 years with difficulty walking due to distal lower limb weakness and foot drop. Her older sibs had onset of a similar disorder at ages 23 and 20 years. All sibs had slowly progressive weakness, hypotonia, and muscle atrophy of the lower limbs, more pronounced distally. Knee and ankle jerks were absent; 1 patient had pes cavus. The 2 older sibs used a wheelchair and the proband used a walker. The upper limbs were relatively spared, although both triceps and biceps reflexes were absent in all patients. One patient had mild dysphonic speech, but none had cognitive, sensory, cerebellar, or autonomic symptoms. Nerve conduction studies showed decreased motor amplitudes in the peroneal and tibial regions. Electromyography showed severe denervation of distal, and later, proximal muscles of the lower limbs with mild denervation of some intrinsic hand muscles. Gess et al. (2014) reported 2 sisters, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with onset of a pure motor neuropathy at ages 16 and 19 years, respectively. Initial symptoms included frequent stumbling due to weakness of the distal lower limbs. Physical examination showed mild atrophy of the peroneal muscles, mild paresis of the foot and toe dorsiflexors, and weakness of knee flexion. Neither patient had sensory involvement. Nerve conduction studies showed a pure motor axonal neuropathy. Gess et al. (2014) reported 2 sisters of Austrian descent with onset of a distal sensory neuropathy, which they authors designated axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2), at 30 and 23 years of age. Initial symptoms included unstable gait and dys/paresthesias in the distal lower limbs. Physical examination showed incomplete paresis of foot and toe dorsiflexion, high steppage gait, peroneal muscle atrophy, and reduced sensation to the middle of the calf. Deep tendon reflexes were absent in the lower limbs and absent or decreased in the upper limbs. Both patients also had mildly reduced force of hip and knee flexors. Nerve conduction studies showed a length-dependent axonal motor and sensory neuropathy. Electromyographic studies in 1 patient showed mild fibrillations in the tibial muscle. Whole-exome sequencing identified a homozygous missense variant in the DNAJB2 gene (Y5C; 604139.0003) that segregated with the disorder in the family. Functional studies were not performed. The proband was 1 of 90 patients with autosomal recessive inherited neuropathies who underwent genetic studies. The Y5C mutation had previously been found in this family by Schabhuttl et al. (2014), who reported the family as family HMNS-R1. The findings expanded the phenotype associated with DNAJB2 mutations to include sensory impairment.
614882	Poulos et al. (1995) described 2 patients who formed a novel peroxisome biogenesis disorder complementation group (group G). Patient 1 was a male infant born to consanguineous Dutch parents. Decreased fetal movement had been noted and the infant was hypotonic at birth. Dysmorphic features included hypertelorism, prominent epicanthic folds, mild micrognathia, and high-arched palate. Ears were box-shaped and slightly low-set. The metopic and sagittal sutures were widely patent; anterior and posterior fontanels were in continuity. Seizures developed on day 1 of life and were controlled with treatment. The condition of the patient deteriorated and he died at 4 months of age. Autopsy showed irregular costochondral ossification in ribs and vertebrae, and marked hypercellularity of marrow preferentially affecting the myeloid series. The cerebrum showed focal microgyria with prominent subcortical ectopic neurons. The inferior olivary nucleus of the medulla was broken into islands with a marked concentration of neurons around the periphery of the nuclei. Patient 2 was the son of consanguineous Italian parents. Fetal movements were poor and the infant was cyanotic at birth, markedly hypotonic, and lacked deep tendon reflexes. He had a prominent midface and downslanting palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, small low-set ears, prominent nose, and high-arched palate. His facies were not considered typical of Zellweger syndrome. There was a slight corneal haze but no cataracts. The liver was enlarged. Echocardiography revealed a right-sided aortic arch, anomalous origin of the right pulmonary artery from the aorta, supravalvular pulmonary stenosis, secundum atrial septal defect, and membranous ventricular septal defect. Seizures developed in the first 20 hours and were controlled by phenobarbital. The infant died at 19 days of age of congestive heart failure. Autopsy showed mild focal microgyria but no obvious subcortical ectopic neurons. Inferior olives were in the form of a broad band, with no obvious concentration of neurons around the periphery. A similarly affected elder sib had died at 15 days of age. Both patients 1 and 2 lacked peroxisomes. Lab values were all abnormal and fell in ranges observed for patients with peroxisome biogenesis disorders. Muntau et al. (2000) reported 2 unrelated patients with Zellweger syndrome of complementation group G. The patients were male infants from unrelated consanguineous Dutch and Italian families. One showed marked muscular hypotonia at birth. Dysmorphic features included hypertelorism, prominent epicanthic folds, and a high, broad forehead with round face. Seizures developed on day 1 but were controlled with treatment. His condition deteriorated rapidly, with death at age 4 months. The other patient was cyanotic and markedly hypotonic at birth with absent deep tendon reflexes. He had a prominent midface and an antimongoloid slant of the palpebral fissures, ocular hypertelorism, small low-set ears, a prominent nose, and a high-arched palate. The patient died at age 19 days. A brother had been similarly affected and died at age 15 days.
614883	Al-Dirbashi et al. (2009) studied 2 Saudi patients, children of consanguineous parents, with Zellweger syndrome who were identified in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). The first patient was admitted immediately after birth with severe hypotonia. He had large anterior fontanel and high forehead. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed polymicrogyria, lissencephaly, and poor myelination. Consistent with the MRI findings, his electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed cortical dysfunction and seizure activity. He died at 6 weeks of age with cardiopulmonary arrest. The second patient was also admitted to NICU shortly after birth because of severe hypotonia and had anteverted nostrils, a depressed nasal bridge, and a large, triangular face. His course was complicated by recurrent apnea, seizures, and elevated liver enzymes. Renal ultrasound revealed the presence of multiple cysts. He remained in the NICU for 4 months before his transfer to the general pediatrics ward where he remained at 6 months of age with severe failure to thrive, progressive hepatic dysfunction, and global developmental delay.
614885	Shimozawa et al. (1998) described a patient with a peroxisome biogenesis disorder who was the child of nonconsanguineous Caucasian parents. Pregnancy, birth, and milestones during the first postnatal year were normal. After an upper respiratory infection at the age of 16 months he became ill with rapidly progressive hypotonia and muscle weakness leading to severe generalized paresis within 2 months, and gavage feeding became necessary. Loss of hearing and visual decline followed within 6 months of onset. There was no external dysmorphia or hepatosplenomegaly. The patient was given a diagnosis of NALD. Krause et al. (2006) reported a Turkish girl with a progressive clinical course characterized by hypotonia and cataracts. She had caudal neuropore and inverted nipples, but none of the dysmorphic features seen in classic Zellweger syndrome. She died at 31 months of age.
614886	Mohamed et al. (2010) studied a female infant, born of consanguineous Saudi parents, with Zellweger syndrome, The patient had neonatal hypotonia, poor growth, and subtle dysmorphic features, including cranial asymmetry, triangular face, low hairline, open fontanels, and broad nasal bridge. Laboratory studies showed elevated liver enzymes, hyperbilirubinemia, and a very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) profile consistent with a PBD. Brain imaging showed cerebral atrophy, cortical changes, and diffuse demyelination. There was a complete absence of peroxisomes in patient fibroblasts. The patient had a severe clinical course, complicated by global developmental delay, refractory seizures, renal tubular defect, multiple gallstones, and recurrent hospitalizations. She died of sepsis at age 16 months.
614887	Shimozawa et al. (2004) studied a patient with Zellweger syndrome. At birth the patient showed typical craniofacial dysmorphia of Zellweger syndrome, including large open fontanels, high forehead, flat occiput, low/broad nasal bridge, and micrognathia, as well as neurologic abnormalities including hypotonia. Plasma analysis showed elevated very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) and di- and trihydroxycholestanoic acid, and a normal phytanic acid level. Erythrocyte plasmalogens were undetectable. The patient died at 10 days of age. The Pakistani patient with Zellweger syndrome studied by Huybrechts et al. (2008) showed prolonged neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and presented at 3 months of age with icterus, axial hypotonia, and hepatomegaly. Dysmorphic features included slight dolichocephaly, triangular face, and large fontanel. Metabolic screening showed increased long chain fatty acids and hypoketotic dicarboxylic aciduria. Further studies showed severe hepatic parenchymatic destruction and cholestasis. His gaze fixed and followed normally, he had normal spontaneous movements in all limbs, but deep tendon reflexes were absent. Radiologic examination of the skeleton was normal. Ophthalmologic examination showed posterior embryotoxon. Metabolic screening at this age showed normal plasma amino acids, phytanic acid, pristanic acid, and C24:0 levels; increased C26:0 values, and decreased C22:0 and plasmalogen concentrations. Cerebral ultrasound and electroencephalography were normal, but brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 5 months and computed tomography (CT) at 13 months showed a polymicrogyria in the right frontal and parietal cortex and left Rolandic cortex, and bilateral zones of laminar heterotopia. An epileptic seizure (unresponsive, cyanosis) was suspected at age 13 months. At the age of 21 months, the patient had lost vision and showed generalized hypotonia, with no spontaneous movements anymore. The cholestasis had completely disappeared (normal bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase) but transaminases remained high. Plasma phytanic acid was at the upper limit of normal, and pristanic acid increased from the age of 14 months on. Plasmalogen content of erythrocytes remained low. Family history revealed that the mother had a mentally retarded sib and a sister with 3 children who all died before age 1 year.
614889	Oleaga-Quintas et al. (2018) reported 3 patients with mycobacterial disease, including 2 sibs from a consanguineous Turkish family and a patient from a consanguineous Indian family. One sib (P1) in the Turkish family was a 9-year-old boy who was vaccinated with BCG at 2 months of age. At age 9 months, he developed local lymphadenitis with a relapse at age 18 months. He developed cervical lymphadenopathy, deep neck abscesses, and cervical bone lesions at age 5 years. At age 7, he developed osteomyelitis in the cervix, thorax, lumbar spine, and sacral bones caused by Mycobacterium bovis-BCG. He was successfully treated with antibiotics and subcutaneous IFNG. His 6-year-old sister (P2) was vaccinated with BCG at 2 months of age and developed vaccination-related suppurative lymphadenitis. She was treated with multiple antibiotics and subcutaneous IFNG. The Indian patient was vaccinated with BCG at 10 days of life. At age 3 months, he developed swelling of the left axillary lymph node, and acid-fast bacilli (AFB) was identified in a blood smear. At age 11 months, he developed inguinal and axillary lymphadenitis and hepatosplenomegaly. M. chelonei was cultured from a lymph node. He died at the age of 5 years from persistent disseminated disease. Hoyos-Bachiloglu et al. (2017) reported a boy, born of consanguineous Saudi parents, who presented at 2 months of age with a febrile illness due to Streptococcus viridans bacteremia and severe cytomegalovirus (CMV) viremia. He rapidly developed anemia, thrombocytopenia, splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy. Laboratory studies were consistent with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). Bone marrow was positive for CMV and mycobacterium abscessus. Laboratory studies showed increased white blood cells and total lymphocytes with mildly decreased CD4+ T cells and increased CD8+ T cells. He received attenuated MMR vaccination with no adverse sequelae. Due to the history of disseminated infections, the patient was scheduled to undergo a hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Whole-exome sequencing in this patient identified a homozygous loss-of-function mutation in the IFNGR2 gene (147569.0007), which explained the mycobacterial disease and confirming IMD28, as well as a homozygous variant in the IFNAR1 gene (107450.0004) that could explain the unusual phenotype of CMV infection. In vitro functional expression studies using patient-derived fibroblasts showed impaired response to stimulation with gamma-IFN and a defect in the IFN type II signaling pathway presumably caused by the IFNGR2 gene, as well as impaired downstream signaling after stimulation with alpha-IFN, indicating a defect in the IFN type I signaling pathway presumably caused by the IFNAR1 variant. These findings of likely digenic inheritance were consistent with the patient's atypical presentation for IMD28. The authors noted that IFNGR2 and IFNAR1 form heterodimers that contribute to defense against viral infections and infection with extracellular bacteria.
614890	Altare et al. (1998) described IL12 deficiency in a child with curable BCG and Salmonella enteritidis infection. The girl was born to consanguineous Pakistani parents and received BCG immunization at birth. She presented 3 months later with local ulceration of her immunization site on her left deltoid region, regional lymphadenopathy, and a discharging sinus from which M. bovis BCG was isolated. Picard et al. (2002) reported 12 additional patients with IL12B deficiency from 5 additional kindreds and reviewed the phenotype of all patients. Among 13 patients with IL12 deficiency, including the patient originally reported by Altare et al. (1998), 1 child had salmonellosis only and 12 suffered from clinical disease due to BCG or environmental nontuberculous mycobacteria. One patient also had clinical disease caused by virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 5 patients had clinical disease caused by Salmonella serotypes, and 1 patient had clinical disease caused by Nocardia asteroides. The clinical outcome varied from case to case. Five patients, aged 2 to 11 years, died of overwhelming infection, whereas 8 patients, aged 3 to 12 years, were still in good health and not taking antibiotics at the time of report.
614891	Fieschi et al. (2003) identified 41 patients in 29 kindreds from 17 countries in Africa, America, Europe, and Asia with complete IL12RB1 surface expression deficiency. Opportunistic childhood infections with weakly virulent Salmonella and Mycobacteria were observed in 34 patients, but 3 patients had clinical tuberculosis, including 1 with salmonellosis. Salmonellosis, but not the mycobacterial infections, was recurrent. BCG vaccination and disease protected against environmental mycobacteriosis, but not against salmonellosis. BCG disease occurred in only 9 of 27 inoculated children. Fatality before age 8 occurred in 5 patients, 3 due to M. avium in non-BCG-vaccinated children and 2 due to disseminated BCG; the remaining patients were alive and well. Fieschi et al. (2003) proposed that IL12RB1 deficiency should be considered in children with opportunistic mycobacteriosis or salmonellosis and that the diagnosis should be pursued in healthy sibs of probands and in selected cases of tuberculosis. They concluded that the overall prognosis is good due to broad resistance to infection, low clinical penetrance, and the favorable outcome of the infections. Fieschi et al. (2003) noted the unexpected finding that IL12 is redundant in protective immunity against most microorganisms other than Mycobacteria and Salmonella, possibly reflecting the difference in the natural course of infection in humans as opposed to the courses of experimental infections in animal models. Ozbek et al. (2005) reported an 11-year-old Turkish girl with severe abdominal tuberculosis and autosomal recessive IL12RB1 deficiency. She was the fourth child of healthy, consanguineous parents. Like her parents and sibs, she had had no adverse effect from BCG vaccination, and there was no family history of mycobacterial disease or other intracellular infectious diseases. The patient did not show augmented production of IFNG (147570) in response to antigen plus IL12. Ozbek et al. (2005) concluded that a diagnosis of IL12RB1 deficiency should be considered for children with unusually severe tuberculosis, even if they have no personal or family history of infection with weakly virulent Mycobacterium or Salmonella species. Tabarsi et al. (2011) reported a 33-year-old engineer in Iran with complete autosomal recessive IL12RB1 deficiency who succumbed to disseminated multidrug (isoniazid and rifampin)-resistant TB. The patient had a history of uncomplicated BCG vaccination, normal chest and abdominal radiography, normal immune function, no smoking history, and negative HIV serology and PCR. Two courses of standard anti-TB treatment had not been curative, and sputum tests were persistently positive for acid-fast bacilli (AFB), confirmed by PCR to be M. tuberculosis. Blood cells failed to produce IFNG in response to IL12, but they produced IL12 in response to BCG and IFNG. In response to second-line anti-TB treatment, the patient regained weight during the first 6 months, then developed profuse diarrhea after 8 months of treatment with no detectable pathogens. Colonoscopy and histologic analysis revealed diffuse polypoid ulcers and histiocytes filled with AFB. Tabarsi et al. (2011) concluded that genetic defects in the IL12-IFNG circuit must be considered in adults with disseminated TB, as some of these patients may benefit from IFNG therapy as an adjunct to antimicrobial treatment. Ramirez-Alejo et al. (2014) reported 5 unrelated Mexican children with IMD30 confirmed by genetic analysis. All 5 received BCG vaccinations at birth with no immediate adverse effects, and 4 of the 5 developed disseminated mycobacterial disease several months later. Other infections, particularly candidal, were also present in most patients. One girl presented at age 14 years with features of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; 152700) and developed fatal disseminated infections with mycobacteria and Candida species following immunosuppressive treatment for SLE. Laboratory studies of all patient cells showed impaired IFNG responses to IL12 as well as decreased or absent expression of IL12RB1 on T cells.
614892	In cells from a French patient with a history of disseminated BCG infection with no mutations in the IL12 (see 161561), IL12RB (601604), or IFNGR (see 107470) genes, Dupuis et al. (2001) observed severely impaired nuclear protein binding to IFNG-activating sequences when the cells were stimulated with IFNG or IFNA. Sequence analysis identified a heterozygous mutation in the STAT1 gene (600555.0001). The patient's daughter, who was not vaccinated with BCG, had a similar cellular phenotype in vitro and carried the same mutation. An unrelated American patient with a history of M. avium infection was heterozygous for the same mutation. The mutation was not detected in healthy cohorts. In 2 unrelated patients from Japan and Saudi Arabia with autosomal dominant STAT1 deficiency, Tsumura et al. (2012) identified heterozygous missense mutations affecting the SH2 domain of STAT1. One mutation, lys673 to arg (K673R; 600555.0023), was hypomorphic and impaired STAT1 tyrosine phosphorylation. The other mutation, lys637 to glu (K637E; 600555.0024), was null and affected both STAT1 phosphorylation and DNA-binding activity. Both alleles were dominant-negative and impaired STAT1-mediated cellular responses to IFNG and IL27 (608273), whereas responses to IFNA and IFN-lambda (see 607403) were preserved at normal levels. Tsumura et al. (2012) concluded that the STAT1 SH2 domain is important for tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA binding, as well as antimycobacterial immunity. In 2 unrelated Danish men (P7 and P8), with IMD31A manifest as adult-onset herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE) after age 60, Mork et al. (2015) identified a heterozygous missense mutation in the STAT1 gene (V266I; 600555.0028). The mutation was found by whole-exome sequencing of a cohort of 16 patients with adult-onset HSE and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells showed significantly lower beta-interferon (IFNB1; 147640), CXCL10 (147310), and TNFA (191160) responses to HSV-1 infection compared to controls, suggesting defective antiviral response and a loss of function. Patient cells did not have impaired responses to the TLR3 (603029) agonist poly(I;C). The findings suggested that STAT1 variants may contribute to HSE susceptibility in adults.
614895	Delague et al. (2000) reported a large inbred Lebanese family affected with autosomal recessive demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in which they excluded linkage to the previously known CMT4 loci. Clinical features and results of histopathologic studies confirmed that the disease in this family represented a demyelinating autosomal recessive CMT subtype, which the authors referred to as CMT4F. Histopathologic and immunohistochemical analysis of a sural nerve biopsy of 1 patient revealed common features with the periaxin-null mouse and the absence of L-periaxin from the myelin sheath. These data confirmed the importance of the periaxin proteins to normal Schwann cell function. Takashima et al. (2002) reported 2 sibs with CMT4F. Both had much worse sensory than motor impairment. Despite early onset of disease, these sibs had a relatively slow disease progression and adult motor impairment typical for classic demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Neuropathology showed demyelination, onion bulb and occasional tomacula formation with focal myelin thickening, abnormalities of the paranodal myelin loops, and focal absence of paranodal septate-like junctions between the terminal loops and axon. Kijima et al. (2004) reported 3 unrelated Japanese patients with CMT4F. They presented with early-onset and slowly progressive distal motor and sensory neuropathy. All 3 patients were born of healthy, consanguineous parents. Two of the patients also had an affected sib. On sural nerve biopsy, 1 patient had atypical onion bulb formation, the second had more typical onion bulb formation, and the third had onion bulb and tomacula formation. Kabzinska et al. (2006) reported an 8-year-old boy with severe CMT4F. He began to walk with a clumsy gait at age 2 years and showed foot drop at age 5. He had weak distal muscle weakness of the upper and lower extremities which was more pronounced in the lower limbs, absent reflexes, sensory ataxia, distal sensory impairment, and pes cavus. Electrophysiologic studies showed severely prolonged or absent motor conduction velocities. EMG was consistent with mild stable chronic reinnervation. Sural nerve biopsy showed severe loss of myelinated axons of all diameters, onion bulb formation, and some areas of focally folded myelin. Marchesi et al. (2010) reported 4 adult patients, including 2 sibs, with CMT4F due to homozygous or compound heterozygous truncating mutations in the PRX gene. The patients were between 34 and 45 years of age at the time of the report. All had onset in early childhood with delayed motor development, and achieved walking with an unsteady gait by 2 or 3 years of age. All developed pes cavus and scoliosis of varying severity. There was variable distal muscle weakness and atrophy affecting both the upper and lower limbs and associated with distal sensory impairment; deep tendon reflexes were absent. The patients tended to walk with a steppage gait and some showed sensory ataxia. Nerve conduction velocities were severely decreased, between 3 and 13.3 m/s in the median nerve. Sensory nerve action potentials were undetectable. Sural nerve biopsy of 2 patients showed severe demyelination and complex onion bulb formation and occasional myelin foldings. In a review of previously reported patients with PRX mutations, Marchesi et al. (2010) concluded that the disorder was phenotypically homogeneous with mild variability in severity, and was slowly progressive, despite the early age at onset. Tokunaga et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated Japanese patients with adult-onset CMT4F due to a homozygous R1070X mutation (605725.0008). One patient developed mild distal muscle wasting and sensory disturbance in all limbs at age 50 years. The disorder was slowly progressive, and she could still walk independently at age 63 despite having pes cavus. Sural nerve biopsy showed moderate demyelination and complex onion bulb formation. The other patient developed lower limb weakness at age 37 years. At age 47, he could walk with a walking vehicle. Other features included scoliosis and areflexia. Sural nerve biopsy showed myelin thinning and onion bulbs. Motor nerve conduction velocities in the median nerve were 20 m/s in both patients. Tokunaga et al. (2012) reported another Japanese woman with adult-onset CMT4F. Although she had delayed independent ambulation due to nonspecific infantile paralysis at age 18 months, she developed mild distal muscle weakness and sensory impairment in the lower limbs at age 30 years. Upper limb wasting was observed at age 44 years, and she had vocal cord paralysis. Other features included pes cavus, scoliosis, and areflexia. The disorder was slowly progressive. At age 65, she had to use leg braces and a wheelchair. Nerve conduction velocities were not recordable and sural nerve biopsy showed significant demyelination. Tokunaga et al. (2012) emphasized the late onset and relatively mild phenotype in these 3 patients.
614896	Baig et al. (2011) studied 2 consanguineous Pakistani families in which affected individuals had congenital deafness that was severe (71- to 95-dB loss) to profound (greater than 95-dB loss), without vestibular dysfunction. Three brothers and a sister were affected in 1 family; the youngest brother, aged 15 years, reported episodes of syncope since early childhood that were triggered by enhanced physical activity and stress. In the other family, 2 brothers, aged 22 years and 20 years, were affected, as well as a more distant 24-year-old male relative; the older brother reported several syncopal episodes during normal physical activity between the ages of 3 years and 6 years. Electrocardiograms in all 7 affected individuals showed resting bradycardia with heart rates of 38 beats to 52 beats per minute in the daytime, and rates as low as 32 bpm during the night. QRS complexes were not widened and QT(c) intervals were not prolonged. P waves were visible in most of the recordings, but did not regularly precede QRS complexes, indicating that bradycardia was associated with alteration of atrioventricular conduction. In 3 of the 4 sibs, paired beats occurred during bradycardic episodes, probably triggered by P waves seen in the repolarization phase of the preceding junctional beats. Baig et al. (2011) designated the disorder SANDD, for 'sinoatrial node dysfunction and deafness.'
614897	Young et al. (2012) studied a family segregating autosomal dominant anosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The proband presented at 17 years of age because of pubertal failure, and was found to have features of complete hypogonadism, with mean testicular volume of 2.5 mL and right cryptorchidism; he did not have micropenis. Olfactometry showed hyposmia, and MRI revealed bilateral hypoplasia of the olfactory bulbs, with normal hypothalamus and pituitary. He had very low serum levels of testosterone, LH (152780), and FSH (136530), and the 2 gonadotropins responded only weakly to GnRH challenge. His sister presented at 18 years of age for primary amenorrhea and pubertal failure (Tanner breast stage I). She had very low serum levels of estradiol, LH, and FSH, and was anosmic. Their father had been evaluated for pubertal failure associated with hyposmic HH at 19 years of age. At age 21, he began treatment with replacement GnRH with normalization of gonadotropin and testosterone levels; androgen therapy resulted in satisfactory virilization, but after 5 years his testicular volume was still low and he was azoospermic. Injections with hMG and hCG resulted in induction of spermatogenesis and fertility. Reexamination 6 months after stopping testosterone replacement therapy at 54 years of age showed persistence of his congenital gonadotropin deficiency, with low testicular volume and low gonadotropin and testosterone levels. Family interviews revealed that the father had 2 paternal aunts who also had anosmia, absent pubertal development, and infertility, and his deceased father had isolated anosmia, with normal puberty and fertility without medical assistance. Dai et al. (2020) identified 3 Chinese patients with HH, 2 (patients 1 and 3) with anosmia and 1 (patient 2) without anosmia. Patients 1 and 3 had visual defects (high myopia and anomalous trichromatism, respectively), patients 2 and 3 had cryptorchidism, and patient 1 had scoliosis.
614898	Zivony-Elboum et al. (2012) reported 9 patients from 2 Arab Moslem families with early-onset spastic paraplegia. Affected individuals showed developmental and motor delay during the first 2 years of life. They had unsteadiness in standing and difficulty walking. All affected children presented with spasticity in the lower limbs that progressed to the upper extremities, requiring recurrent physiotherapy and ligament lengthening operations. Marked kyphosis was noted in all patients, and some had pectus carinatum. Some patients regained the ability to walk with aid after botulinum injections. All had mild to moderate cognitive and speech delay. Three patients had hypertrichosis, and 3 had mildly impaired vibration or position sense.
614899	Tabatabaiefar et al. (2011) studied a consanguineous Iranian family in which 4 sibs had stable bilateral symmetric prelingual moderate to severe deafness. Affected family members used a combination of sign language and oral communication. The hearing impairment was slightly more pronounced in the mid-frequencies, resulting in a distinctive shallow U-shaped audiogram. Tympanometry showed normal static compliance and normal middle ear pressures. Schrauwen et al. (2012) examined affected individuals from 2 unrelated consanguineous Iranian families segregating autosomal recessive deafness. All affected individuals had prelingual stable bilateral hearing loss with similar audiometric profiles: the hearing loss was moderate to severe and was more pronounced in the mid-frequencies, resulting in a typical U-shaped audiogram. The affected individuals showed ectomorphic and marfanoid features; ophthalmologic examination was unremarkable except for 1 patient who had myopia and astigmatism, and cardiac examination was unremarkable. Faridi et al. (2024) reported a 25-year-old man from sibship B of a large consanguineous Pakistani pedigree (PKDF1419) with nonsyndromic deafness and mutation in the CABP2 gene. The proband had moderate to severe mixed hearing loss with reduced sensorineural and conductive sound transduction, and exhibited a shallow U-shaped audiogram. The authors noted that newborn screening was not available in Pakistan at the time of the proband's birth, but his unresponsiveness to noise became apparent in early infancy.
614900	Gazda et al. (2012) studied a 3.5-year-old girl with Diamond-Blackfan anemia who was born with isolated cleft palate, absent external auditory meatus on the right and a narrowed meatus on the left, incomplete lower left eyelid, bicuspid aortic valve, and agenesis of the left kidney. In the right upper extremity, she had a single bone in the forearm, likely the ulna, and on the left, synostosis of a shortened radius and ulna; both thumbs were absent and she had 3 digits on each hand. She was anemic at birth, requiring transfusion twice during the perinatal period. By 7 weeks of age, she was again anemic and profoundly neutropenic; bone marrow examination showed cellularity of 40% with markedly decreased erythropoiesis. She had a good response to steroids and was maintained on a minimal dose with only occasional neutropenia and no further need for transfusions.
614915	Markus et al. (2012) studied 2 consanguineous families from apparently unrelated Bedouin tribes in southern Israel in which affected individuals had a clinical phenotype 'identical to that of LCCS3' (611369) but were negative for mutation in the PIP5K1C gene (606102) as well as in the 2 other genes known to cause LCCS.
614916	Nyegaard et al. (2012) studied a large 4-generation Swedish family with a history of ventricular arrhythmias, syncope, and sudden death, predominantly in association with physical exercise or stress. The proband was a 42-year-old man who first developed syncope at 12 years of age while playing football; electrocardiogram (ECG) at that time showed bradycardia with a prominent U-wave in leads V2 and V3, without evidence of QT prolongation. He had a history of loss of consciousness on at least 4 occasions during physical activity and once in connection with a fire alarm. A 24-hour ECG recording revealed premature ventricular contractions (PVCs), bigeminy, and paired PVCs during football training, but no symptoms were reported. An older brother with a history of repeated syncope during exercise was reported to show polymorphic ventricular tachycardia on an exercise ECG; a follow-up ECG while on a beta-1 adrenergic receptor blocker showed PVCs at high loads. He had a son with syncope. The proband also had a brother who had drowned at 15 years of age during a swimming competition after prior episodes of syncope, and an older sister who had episodic syncope and was later found to have ventricular fibrillation, but stabilized on a beta-1 adrenergic receptor blocker and became asymptomatic. In addition, a younger sister presented at 7 years of age with repeated syncope during intense physical activity, and she also had a son with syncope. Their mother, who died at age 60, had multiple episodes of syncope in her youth for which she received medication. The proband's older sister had 6 children, 4 of whom were affected, including a son who died suddenly at 13 years of age while on a beta-1 adrenergic receptor blocker for syncopal episodes that had started at 2.5 years of age. A daughter, who began having syncope at 4 years of age and was asymptomatic on a beta-1 adrenergic receptor blocker, suffered cardiac arrest at age 16, was resuscitated, and received an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD). Two more daughters also presented with syncope within the first decade of life, and 1 had a son with syncope.
614920	Ebberink et al. (2012) described a 26-year-old Dutch man with mild intellectual disability and a normal karyotype who was the fourth child of nonconsanguineous parents and had 2 healthy brothers and 1 healthy sister. The mother had had 3 miscarriages. After uncomplicated delivery and birth, with normal growth parameters, he was noted at 6 weeks of age to have bilateral congenital cataracts; these were extracted at 4 and 5 months, respectively. Early development was normal but after a surgery for hydrocele he underwent a remarkable regression, losing speech and ability to walk, and it took half a year for him to reach his former level. In general, when ill his condition became rather poor and he took a long time to recover. He had dry skin with scaling of the hands and feet. He developed progressive bilateral sensorineural hearing loss starting at the age of 7 years. At age 12, he was noted to have nystagmus with a rotatory component, normal strength, normal sensation, but symmetrically reduced reflexes in the upper extremities, areflexia in the lower extremities, and sensory abnormalities. Cardiac function was normal. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a Chiari I malformation. Electroencephalogram (EEG) was normal. Electromyography (EMG) showed low normal motor conduction velocity and absent sensory responses. Over time he became wheelchair-bound and suffered from gastrointestinal problems and urinary incontinence. Since the age of 15, he had recurrent severe migraine-like episodes of photophobia, headaches, and vomiting, often following mental stress or physical exertion. Since the age of 16.5 years, he had been treated with valproic acid, coenzyme Q10, and carnitine. Tian et al. (2020) reported a 9-year-old Chinese girl with bilateral nystagmus, congenital cataracts, myopia, strabismus, hypertonia, and impaired intellectual development. Very long chain fatty acids, bile acid intermediates, plasmalogens, and phytanic acid were normal. A younger brother had a similar phenotype.
614921	Stojkovic et al. (2009) reported a 35-year-old man with recurrent muscle cramps provoked by exercise. He had had 2 episodes of dark-brown urine after strenuous exercise, suggesting rhabdomyolysis. Neurologic examination showed mild weakness of the pelvic-girdle muscles; serum creatine kinase and ammonia were increased after strenuous exercise. Muscle biopsy showed abnormal subsarcolemmal and sarcoplasmic accumulations of normally structured, free glycogen. An in vitro muscle study of anaerobic glycogenolysis and glycolysis showed a metabolic block after formation of glucose-1-phosphate and before formation of glucose-6-phosphate, indicating a phosphoglucomutase deficiency. PGM1 activity was 1% of control values. Stojkovic et al. (2009) concluded that this disorder is a rare glycolytic disorder, which should be designated glycogenosis, or glycogen storage disease, type XIV. In a follow-up report, Tegtmeyer et al. (2014) found that the patient reported by Stojkovic et al. (2009) had abnormal liver enzymes and an abnormal pattern of transferrin glycosylation, consistent with a congenital disorder of glycosylation. Timal et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated children with congenital disorder of glycosylation type It. One boy was adopted and of Colombian origin. He had cerebral thrombosis and dilated cardiomyopathy, and died at age 8 years. Laboratory studies showed low levels of antithrombin III (SERPINC1; 107300) and elevated liver enzymes. The other child was a 16-year-old Caucasian girl who had Pierre Robin sequence, cleft palate, fatigue, dyspnea, tachycardia, dilated cardiomyopathy, and chronic hepatitis. Laboratory studies showed increased serum creatine kinase and liver enzymes. Transferrin isoelectric focusing in both patients showed abnormal N-glycosylation. In addition to the loss of complete N-glycans, there were minor bands of monosialo- and trisialotransferrin, suggesting the presence of incomplete glycans. Thus, the pattern could best be described as CDGI/II. Tegtmeyer et al. (2014) reported 19 patients from 16 families with CDG1T, including the 3 patients reported by Stojkovic et al. (2009) and Timal et al. (2012). Patients displayed a wide range of clinical features, but all had signs of hepatopathy with abnormal liver enzymes and sometimes with steatosis and fibrosis. The majority of patients had muscle symptoms, including exercise intolerance and muscle weakness; 5 had a history of rhabdomyolysis. Serum creatine kinase was often elevated, and hypoglycemia was common. Most patients were noted to have cleft palate and bifid uvula at birth, and many of these patients had short stature later in life. Six patients developed dilated cardiomyopathy, including 3 who were listed for heart transplantation. Two patients developed malignant hyperthermia after the administration of general anesthesia. Two unrelated girls had hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with delayed puberty. Patient cells showed considerable variability in the transferrin-glycoform profile, with forms lacking one or both glycans as well as forms with truncated glycans, consistent with a mixed type I/II pattern. Cells also showed increased concentrations of galactose- and glucose-1-phosphate compared to controls. Addition of galactose to cell cultures enhanced glycosylation but did not affect glycogen content. A subset of patients treated with oral galactose showed improved transferrin glycosylation, and the 2 girls with delayed puberty showed resolution of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism after treatment with galactose. Conte et al. (2020) reported clinical data on 54 patients, including 11 newly reported and 43 identified in a literature review. The most common clinical features were elevated transaminases in 96%, growth delay in 89%, hypoglycemia in 89%, and cleft palate or bifid uvula in 87%. Other common clinical features included abnormal cardiac function and dilated cardiomyopathy in 46%, hepatic defects in 46%, and myopathy or muscle symptoms in 57%. Neurologic symptoms, including seizures, paralysis, hypotonia, impaired intellectual development, and psychomotor impairment, were seen in 43%. In comparing features in early or later clinical presentation (before or after 1 year of age), respiratory tract symptoms and oral/gastrointestinal defects were reported significantly more frequently in the younger group. Thyroid hormone abnormalities were reported more frequently in female patients. Radenkovic et al. (2024) evaluated coagulation abnormalities and response to D-galactose (D-gal) treatment in 2 cohorts of patients with CDG1T: 73 patients identified in a literature search and 16 patients from the Frontiers in Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation natural history study. The literature review revealed that coagulation parameters, measured in 42 patients, were abnormal in 29. Antithrombin III (AT) levels were abnormal in 9/9 patients, aPTT levels were reported as abnormal in 3/11 and as decreased in 5/11 patients, factor XI levels were abnormal in 4/4 patients, and protein C and protein S were each abnormal in 2/2 patients. PT levels were abnormal in 5/6 patients. Factor IX levels were normal in 6/6 patients. Major thrombotic vascular events were reported in 4 patients. AT levels improved, but did not normalize, in 5/7 patients treated with D-gal. Among 16 patients in the longitudinal natural history study, 15 were treated with D-gal: factor XI was abnormal in 4/7 patients and normalized in 3 after treatment; protein C was abnormal in 8/10 patients and normalized in 1 patient after treatment; and PT was abnormal in 5 patients and normalized in 2 patients after treatment.
614922	Ferreiro-Barros et al. (2008) reported a male infant, born of consanguineous Saudi Arabian parents, with severe neonatal encephalopathy resulting in death at age 18 months. The infant was unresponsive at birth, but was successfully resuscitated and intubated. He had little spontaneous limb movement and required mechanical ventilation. Physical examination showed tongue fasciculations, equinus deformities of the feet, and profound limb hypotonia with absent reflexes. He developed myoclonic jerks at age 3 days. Laboratory studies showed increased serum and CSF lactate. EEG was severely abnormal with diffuse signal attenuation, low amplitude, and slow activity consistent with postanoxic encephalopathy. Brain MRI showed signs of immaturity with prominence of the cortical sulci, possible pachygyria of the anterior frontal and temporal lobes, and hypomyelination. Muscle biopsy showed diffuse mitochondrial complex IV deficiency with low-normal activities of mitochondrial complexes I+III and II+III. There were reductions in the steady-state of complexes I, IV, and V, whereas complex II was normal and complex III was increased. Immunoblot analysis in patient cells showed a decrease of mitochondrial proteins, consistent with a defect in mitochondrial protein synthesis. Sural nerve biopsy revealed sparse myelinated nerve fibers, indicating severe loss of fibers and endoneural fibrosis consistent with a peripheral neuropathy. Fusion of patient cells with normal nuclear DNA complemented the defect, indicating that it was of nuclear origin. The diagnosis was profound neonatal encephaloneuromyopathy with cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency. Family history revealed an older sister with congenital arthrogryposis, short neck, breathing problems, breech presentation, and hypoventilation requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. Garcia-Diaz et al. (2012) provided follow-up of the family reported by Ferreiro-Barros et al. (2008) and reported 4 additional affected family members. Three infants presented with severe neonatal encephaloneuromyopathy at birth and showed lethargy, respiratory failure, profound floppiness, hyporeflexia or areflexia, equinus deformities, lactic acidosis, and death in the first year of life, whereas the fifth affected individual was stillborn and did not have skeletal deformities. Fibroblast studies of 1 patient confirmed deficiencies in multiple mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes. Janer et al. (2012) reported a female infant, born of consanguineous parents, with encephalopathy and lactic acidosis. She was normal at birth, but developed seizures on day 6 and had severe hypotonia requiring tube feeding. At 4 months of age, she had unremitting seizures and her head circumference was not increasing; she died at age 5 months. Laboratory studies showed increased serum and CSF lactate, and cultured fibroblasts showed severely decreased cytochrome c oxidase activity. There were also assembly defects in complexes I, III, IV, and V, suggesting a mitochondrial translation defect. Postmortem examination showed marked cortical atrophy, and atrophic cord, ventricular dilation, and a thin corpus callosum. Microscopic analysis showed widespread vacuolation of cortical gray matter and status spongiosus, and extensive loss of myelin in the brainstem. Family history revealed an older sister who developed intractable seizures at 2 months of age and died at age 13 months. Brain CT scan showed cerebral atrophy and microcephaly. Taylor et al. (2014) reported 5 unrelated children, born of consanguineous British Pakistani parents, with COXPD11. The patients developed symptoms in infancy, and 2 died. All patients had muscle involvement and deafness; additional features included central nervous system, renal, and cardiac involvement. Patient cells showed deficiencies of mitochondrial respiratory complexes I, III, and IV. A sixth patient with a similar disorder was also reported. Janer et al. (2015) reported a boy, born of unrelated Caucasian parents, with COXPD11. He had failure to thrive with severe feeding difficulties in the first month of life and presented with epileptic encephalopathy and lactic acidosis at age 8 weeks. Laboratory studies showed lactic acidosis, anemia, hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and hypertension. Echocardiogram showed mild left ventricle hypertrophy secondary to high blood pressure. He developed progressive renal failure and by age 3 years, he had end-stage renal tubulopathy. He had delayed psychomotor development with absent language, hearing loss, and seizures. Brain imaging showed T2-weighted signal abnormalities in the white matter and delayed myelination. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed decreased activities of mitochondrial respiratory complexes I, III, IV, and V, suggestive of a mitochondrial translation defect. The patient died at 4 years of age: postmortem examination showed hypoplastic kidneys with cysts and focal medullary calcification, enlarged liver with microvesicular steatosis and absent glycogen, and nodular adrenal glands. Ravn et al. (2016) reported 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents, with a slightly milder form of COXPD11 and longer survival. The patients were 17 and 13 years of age. Both had progressive renal failure and underwent successful renal transplantation, which may have contributed to the survival. The girls had failure to thrive in infancy, hypotonia, hearing impairment, and intellectual disability. One patient had normal brain imaging, whereas the other had loss of white matter in the temporal lobe; the latter patient also had seizures. Respiratory chain enzyme analysis showed decreased activities of complexes I, II, and IV, which was more pronounced in skeletal muscle than in fibroblasts.
614923	Novarino et al. (2012) studied 3 consanguineous families with autism, epilepsy, impaired intellectual development, and reduced branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs). All patients were born at full term to unaffected parents. The first family (558), of Turkish origin, had 2 affected daughters. The first daughter developed normally until the age of 18 months, when she had her first seizure. She met criteria for autism by 15 years of age. At ages 20 and 21, electroencephalogram (EEG) detected extratemporal and generalized epileptiform abnormalities, and despite treatment with anticonvulsants, she had tonic-clonic seizures every 3 months lasting 3 to 4 minutes each. Her sister was similarly affected. The second family (18) was of Egyptian origin and consisted of an affected brother and sister. The girl had had a febrile seizure at 1 year of age and a generalized nonfebrile seizure at 8 years of age. EEG at age 8 showed frequent focal spike wave complexes over the left temporal region consistent with left temporal epileptogenic dysfunction. Her similarly affected brother had 4 febrile seizures at the age of 12 months; he was started on valproate and had a recurrence of febrile seizures every 4 to 5 months subsequently. At age 2 years 5 months he started on phenobarbital and had not had a seizure since. The family history was notable for a paternal uncle with schizophrenia, a second-degree cousin with intellectual disability, and a distant cousin also with schizophrenia. A third consanguineous family (1435) of Libyan origin consisted of 2 affected brothers. The first boy at 9 years of age was able to follow simple directions but did not speak. EEG was normal at age 11 years. He met criteria for autism on several scales. The similarly affected second brother had abnormal EEG at age 7, with right temporal slowing and rare surface negative frontal sharp waves. Tangeraas et al. (2023) described 21 patients from 13 families with BCKDK deficiency and mutation in the BCKDK gene who were recruited from several countries. The average age at diagnosis was 5.8 years. Most patients were born at term and had normal head circumferences; however, 80% developed microcephaly. All of the patients had global developmental delay, all patients older than 2 years of age had a language impairment, and 19 patients had gross motor function impairment. Other neurologic features included epilepsy in 9 patients, movement disorders in 3, impaired intellectual development in 16, hyperreflexia in 3, and clumsiness in 12. Twelve patients had autism spectrum disorder. Other clinical features included dry skin in 2 patients and acrodermatitis enteropathica in 3. Brain MRIs were normal in 11 of 19 patients, and findings were nonspecific in the other 8, including agenesis of the corpus callosum in 2 patients and a thin corpus callosum in 2 patients.
614924	Steenweg et al. (2012) reported a 6-year-old Italian boy with a leukoencephalopathy apparent since early infancy. Hypotonia was noted at 1 month of age, and he did not have head control at 3 months. The patient developed seizures at age 6 months, which later remitted. At age 6 years, he had spastic tetraparesis, dystonia, bradykinesia, ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, visual deficits, and absence of speech. He never achieved postural or head control and could not chew. Laboratory studies showed intermittent increases of serum transaminases, increased alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; 104150), and increased serum lactate. Muscle biopsy showed cytochrome c oxidase (COX)-negative fibers and reduced complex I, III, and IV, indicating a mitochondrial defect. Steenweg et al. (2012) identified 11 additional patients with a similar brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pattern from a database of patients with leukoencephalopathies of unknown origin. Three of the patients had a more severe phenotype similar to that of the Italian boy. The severe phenotype was characterized by onset soon after birth of hypotonia and lack of psychomotor development followed by spastic tetraparesis, dystonia, visual impairment, and seizures. These patients later stabilized, but failed to improve and remained severely disabled and eventually were tube-fed. Eight of the additional patients had a milder form of the disorder. They had normal or mildly delayed early development with onset of regression later in the first year of life. Regression included spasticity, loss of milestones, and sometimes seizures and extreme irritability. However, from the second year on, these patients showed clinical and biochemical improvement. They regained milestones, including walking, and seizures and spasticity improved. Lactate levels decreased and normalized, and brain MRI abnormalities improved. Of note, there were 2 affected brothers: 1 had the milder phenotype and the other had the more severe phenotype. Steenweg et al. (2012) interpreted the data as pointing to a biphasic clinical course. The severity of an initial hit early in life predicts whether or not a patient shows neurologic recovery and progress or has severe and permanent handicap. Talim et al. (2013) reported a male infant, born of consanguineous parents, with multiple congenital anomalies and multisystem dysfunction resulting in death at age 3 months from bronchopneumonia. Hypospadias and incomplete cleft palate were noted at birth, and he presented with hypotonia, failure to thrive, and lactic acidosis in the neonatal period. Brain MRI at age 1 month showed dysgenesis in the posterior part of corpus callosum; white matter abnormalities were not noted. He did not have seizures, but did not achieve any motor milestones. Other features included hepatomegaly, elevated liver enzymes, and mild hypertrophy of the cardiac interventricular septum. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed ragged-red and ragged-blue fibers, COX deficiency, and severe combined deficiency of respiratory chain complexes I and IV. Postmortem examination of the liver showed macrovesicular steatosis with mild fibrosis and cholestasis. Boutaud et al. (2023) reported in 2 sib fetuses (family C) with COXPD12. One sib had agenesis of the splenium and hypertelorism, a broad nose, and short columella. The other sib had microcephaly and agenesis of the corpus callosum. Brain MRI of the Italian boy reported by Steenweg et al. (2012) showed T2-weighted hyperintensities of the deep cerebral white matter, including the thalami and hypothalami, as well as in the brainstem and cerebellum, with sparing of the periventricular region. The posterior part of the corpus callosum was abnormally thin. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) showed increased lactate in the cerebral white matter. Eleven additional patients with a similar brain MRI pattern were identified from a large database. They had signal abnormalities and swelling of the deep cerebral white matter with sparing of the periventricular rim. The corpus callosum, thalamus, basal ganglia, midbrain, pons, medulla, and cerebellar white matter were consistently affected. In 5 patients, the posterior part of the corpus callosum was abnormally thin. Three patients with a more severe clinical phenotype had a dysplastic corpus callosum with agenesis of the posterior part and abnormal positioning of the lateral ventricles.
614926	Pallister and Opitz (1979) reported 3 sisters with ovarian dysgenesis and moderate to severe sensorineural deafness. The proband was a 13-year-old girl who lacked pubertal development and was found to have moderately severe hearing loss at age 3. She had some mild dysmorphic features, such as epicanthal folds and scrotal tongue. Pelvic examination showed infantile female external and internal genitalia with gonadal streaks. Two older sisters, ages 36 and 27 years, respectively, had a similar phenotype. Both had primary amenorrhea, sexual infantilism, streak gonads, and sensorineural hearing loss, although 1 had hearing loss first noted as an adult. Two older brothers in their thirties had early-onset sensorineural hearing loss but normal pubertal maturation and fertility. All females had normal 46,XX karyotypes. Both parents had normal hearing.
614929	Naeem et al. (2007) reported a consanguineous Pakistani family in which multiple members had a hair/nail type of ectodermal dysplasia. In those affected, hair was absent from the scalp, face, chest, arms, and legs. The patients were born completely devoid of eyebrows and eyelashes and never developed axillary and pubic hair. Nail abnormalities were present on all digits; both fingernails and toenails had a dystrophic appearance. Rasool et al. (2010) described a large consanguineous Pakistani family in which 4 of 7 children had an autosomal recessive form of hair/nail ectodermal dysplasia. The affected individuals, 1 male and 3 females, had a generalized hypotrichosis present since birth. Eyebrows, eyelashes, and body hair were present but thin. The hairs appeared brittle and somewhat inflexible, with fragile shafts that broke relatively easily on mechanical stress. The hair was sparse and evenly distributed over the head in 3 patients, but 1 patient had hypotrichosis more pronounced on the scalp. Nail dystrophy was present in all 4, with a similar, relatively mild expression. All fingers and toes had a relative micronychia and mild distal onycholysis. The growth of both hair and nails was reduced compared to that in the healthy sibs. Affected family members had normal dentition and no skin abnormalities, and they reported normal sweating. Raykova et al. (2014) reported further on this family and noted that the clinical phenotype was relatively mild compared to previously reported forms of autosomal recessive hair/nail ectodermal dysplasia. They described hypotrichosis with 'shaggy' hair shafts as well as slightly spoon-shaped nails, mild micronychia, and distal onycholysis.
614931	Lin et al. (2012) described a 5-generation consanguineous Chinese Hui family segregating ectodermal dysplasia-9. The 3 affected individuals showed congenital atrichia and severe nail dystrophy. All vellus, lanugo, and terminal hairs were absent on the scalp and body, and axillary and pubic hairs never developed during puberty. Soft and small keratinized structures developed later on all digits and presented as micronychia. The affected individuals described that they never need their nails trimmed. The 2 male affected individuals underwent surgical management for unilateral cryptorchidism and inguinal hernia, and urologists suspected a diagnosis of persistent Mullerian duct syndrome (261550). No genital anomalies were observed in the affected female individual. No abnormalities of the nervous system, skeleton, sweat glands, sebaceous glands, eyes, or teeth were observed. Histopathological examination of scalp skin of the index individual showed an apparently reduced number of hair follicles with disorganized hair shafts lacking the normal layered structure. Lin et al. (2012) also described a 21-year-old Afghan female who presented with severe congenital hypotrichosis and nail dystrophy. She had her nails trimmed once a month and had never cut her hair.
614932	Vedrenne et al. (2012) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Moroccan parents, with early onset severe encephalomyopathy, choreoathetotic movements, and combined mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency. The first child was a girl who had normal development for the first 6 months of life, but at approximately 9 months of age she developed poor feeding, swallowing difficulties, and abnormal movements, including dystonia, choreoathetosis, and buccofacial dyskinesias. She lost purposeful hand movements and could no longer hold her bottle. At age 10 years she was severely hypotrophic, bed- and wheelchair-bound, and could not stand or sit unaided. Voluntary movements were slow; she had severe muscle weakness, no head control, and permanent buccofacial dyskinesias. There was muscle atrophy and lack of reflexes; nerve conduction velocities were also decreased. She could not speak, but she understood and obeyed simple orders and was conscious. Eye movements were normal. Her affected brother also had normal early development and presented with motor regression with truncal hypotonia and choreoathetotic movements at 6 months of age. At age 3.5 years he had global hypotonia, limb dystonia, and permanent choreoathetotic movements. The disorder in both children was severe and nonprogressive. Laboratory studies showed mildly increased plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lactate, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed hyperintensities in the bilateral putamen and caudate nuclei. Liver biopsy of the girl showed a severe decrease in the activity of mitochondrial complexes III and IV, but there was normal enzyme activity in her skeletal muscle and in skin fibroblasts of the boy. Alodaib et al. (2017) reported 2 brothers who presented in infancy with hypotonia, global developmental delay, areflexia, sensory and autonomic neuropathy, bulbar palsy, auditory neuropathy with hearing loss, optic atrophy, and nystagmus. They also had chronic lung disease due to aspiration and gastrointestinal problems, including gastroesophageal reflux, constipation, and gastroparesis. Serum lactate was not elevated. Fibroblasts from 1 of the boys showed combined mitochondrial OXPHOS deficiency with a reduction in the levels and activities of complexes I, III, and IV; skeletal muscle did not show these abnormalities. Dhir et al. (2018) reported 4 children diagnosed with a mitochondrial disorder who carried homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the PNPT1 gene. Patient 4 was the male sib reported by Vedrenne et al. (2012). Patient 1 had died at 2 years of age, while patients 2, 3, and 4 were alive at 1, 7, and 13 years of age, respectively. All had hypotonia, and MRI of brain showed signal abnormalities in putamen, basal ganglia, caudate nuclei, or corpus callosum as well as delayed myelination. Nystagmus or abnormal eye movements, deafness, and sensory neuropathy were also reported. Elevated lactate and mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency in muscle and/or fibroblasts were reported in patients 1, 2, and 4; lactate and respiratory chain activity in fibroblasts was reported as normal in patient 3. Rius et al. (2019) reported 6 patients, ranging from 1.2 to 10 years of age, with COXPD13 due to biallelic mutations in the PNPT1 gene who presented at birth or in the first weeks of life with hypotonia, irritability, and feeding difficulties. All but 1 patient (P3.2) had global developmental delay with inability to walk and severe to profound intellectual disability with variable speech delay; a few patients were nonverbal, but others achieved fluency. P3.2 was reported to have mildly abnormal muscle tone in the neonatal period, but had normal development at 14 months of age and was learning to walk and talk. His 3-year-old sister (P3) was more severely affected, consistent with intrafamilial variability: she was unable to walk or speak and showed axial hypotonia, peripheral hypertonia, dystonia, choreoathetosis, brisk reflexes, and possible seizures. Additional variable clinical features observed among the patients included areflexia, dystonia, sensory and autonomic neuropathy, nystagmus, optic atrophy, visual impairment, and sensorineural hearing impairment. Some patients had mild seizures or EEG abnormalities. Other features included dysphagia, gastroesophageal reflux, constipation, sleep apnea or reactive airway disease, hip dysplasia, recurrent infections, and scoliosis. Brain imaging showed nonspecific abnormalities in some patients, including white matter atrophy and thin corpus callosum. Serum lactate was elevated in only 1 patient, and the few patients tested had normal or mildly decreased mitochondrial respiratory chain activity. Bamborschke et al. (2021) reported an infant girl with oxidative phosphorylation deficiency due to mutation in the PNPT1 gene. She presented at 3 months of age with feeding difficulties, hyperexcitability, and a sterile febrile episode. Brain MRI showed enlarged cerebrospinal fluid spaces, a thin corpus callosum, and abnormal signal in the frontal temporal region that was suspicious for necrosis. She had severe neurodevelopmental regression and secondary microcephaly. At 6 months of age, she developed seizures and had dystonic crises with dyskinesia and opisthotonic posturing. Laboratory testing revealed an increased interferon score, which was consistent with constitutive type I interferon activation. She died at 20 months of age due to cardiorespiratory arrest. Kuht et al. (2021) reported 3 sibs, aged 25, 24, and 21 years, with oxidative phosphorylation deficiency due to mutation in the PNPT1 gene. All 3 presented with motor developmental delay, mild to moderate hearing deficits, dysarthria, learning disability, and choreoathetoid movements. The 2 older sibs showed a more severe phenotype and were wheelchair bound, whereas the youngest sib used a walker. All 3 had reduced visual acuity and color vision. Because the severity of the motor phenotype precluded the use of table-mounted ocular coherence tomography (OCT), the authors performed ocular examinations with a handheld OCT and handheld fundus camera. All 3 sibs had temporal disc pallor and peripapillary atrophy, which was more severe in the 2 older sibs, who also showed pigmentary changes at the macula. OCT revealed that all 3 sibs had significant global thinning of the retinal nerve fiber layer, which was most severe in the temporal region, consistent with profound papillomacular bundle loss. Correlating with the structural changes, visual field testing revealed a centrocecal scotoma in the youngest sib. Foveal OCT revealed significant reduction in overall foveal thickness, suggestive of foveal atrophy, and this was most severe in the oldest sib. The authors noted that the severity of the ocular changes correlated with the severity of the motor phenotype, and stated that this was the first report of foveal atrophy in patients with PNPT1 mutations. Hosseini Bereshneh et al. (2021) reported a patient who presented at 10 months of age with global developmental delay and height and weight below the 3rd percentile with a normal head circumference. On examination, he had truncal hypotonia, chorea, dystonia, and lower extremity spasticity. He also had bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. At 34 months of age, he had bulbar dysfunction and cachexia. Serial brain imaging at 8, 24, and 34 months of age demonstrated diffuse delayed myelination before 2 years of age, symmetric basal ganglia involvement, mild superior vermis atrophy, and thinning of the corpus callosum. MRI at 3.5 years of age showed progressive caudate and putamen atrophy. Pennisi et al. (2022) reported brain imaging features in 6 patients with mutations in the PNPT1 gene. Patient 1 had an isolated thick corpus callosum on MRI. Patients 2-4 had white matter abnormalities including bilateral leukoencephalopathy with cysts in the temporal lobes (patients 2 and 3) and diffuse white matter abnormalities without cysts (patient 4). Patients 5 and 6 had basal ganglia abnormalities consistent with Leigh syndrome (see 256000). Pennisi et al. (2022) noted that the findings in patients 2 and 3 were similar to neuroimaging abnormalities seen in RNASET2-deficient patients (see 612951) and patients with Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome (see 225750), which may be due to the overlapping pathologic activation of interferon type I in these disorders. Rius et al. (2019) reported a 78-year-old man (P4) with a protracted disease course showing features consistent with COXPD13. He presented at 11 years of age with hearing and visual loss due to optic atrophy. Over the following decades, he developed progressive ataxia, external ophthalmoplegia, large fiber neuropathy, and depression. Genetic analysis identified compound heterozygous missense variants in the PTPNT1 gene (R738C and A684T). Patient fibroblasts showed variable OXPHOS deficiencies and accumulation of aberrantly processed mtRNA, whereas a type I interferon pattern was observed in peripheral blood cells.
614934	Von Ameln et al. (2012) reported a consanguineous Moroccan family in which 3 sibs with mutation in the PNPT1 gene had nonsyndromic severe hearing impairment with prelingual onset in early childhood. No additional manifestations were observed up to 24 years of age (the oldest sib), but the authors noted that they could not exclude the future development of late-onset symptoms in these patients. Eaton et al. (2018) reported 3 adult sibs with mutation in the PNPT1 gene, born of unrelated parents, who presented with isolated severe congenital sensorineural hearing loss that was stable for decades. In their forties, each developed a neurodegenerative disease characterized by gait ataxia resulting in loss of ambulation, dystonia, generalized weakness, and progressive cognitive decline. In their fifties and sixties, they were wheelchair-bound and showed optic nerve atrophy, spasticity, urinary incontinence, and limited communication through sign language. Other features included dysphagia, hypo- or areflexia, extensor plantar responses, and psychiatric disturbances, including mood lability, obsessive compulsive disorder, and paranoia. Brain imaging was essentially normal in 2 patients and showed mild cerebral and cerebellar atrophy in the third. The findings expanded the phenotypic spectrum of the disease and suggested that DFNB70 may not be a nonsyndromic disorder.
614935	Kott et al. (2012) reported 6 patients from 5 unrelated European families with primary ciliary dyskinesia. All had early onset of chronic sinopulmonary infections, including bronchitis resulting in bronchiectasis, rhinosinusitis, and otitis. One patient had nasal polyps and 2 had situs inversus. Nasal respiratory epithelial cells and spermatozoa showed immotile cilia or flagella, and ultrastructural analysis showed absence of both the inner and outer dynein arms of axonemes.
614937	Russell et al. (2012) reported a large 4-generation Canadian Mennonite family in which 11 individuals had adult-onset, slowly progressive cortical myoclonus variably affecting the face and upper and lower extremities. Onset of multifocal myoclonus occurred between the second and seventh decade. Myoclonus was triggered by action, sudden movements, and/or by inadvertent somatosensory stimuli, but not by light, noise, or startle. Symptoms reportedly were aggravated by fatigue, exertion, sleep deprivation, emotion, and hunger. Alcohol reportedly had no consistent effect. Most patients experienced multiple sudden falls without loss of consciousness. Four patients developed mild cerebellar ataxia, usually later in life, and some older patients became wheelchair-bound. None had seizures. Somatosensory evoked potentials confirmed the cortical origin of myoclonus. Myoclonus was suppressed by clonazepam or valproic acid.
614940	Bal et al. (2007) reported a large Moroccan family in which 7 members had the clinical triad of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, i.e., hypotrichosis, hypodontia, and anhidrosis. Wohlfart et al. (2016) described a German family in which a 16-year-old girl, her mother, and her maternal grandfather all had very thin, brittle, sparse or even absent hair and reduced sweating. Dental x-rays of the proband confirmed absence of a considerable number of permanent teeth, and her mother and grandfather also had a reduced number of permanent teeth. The proband had bilateral amazia and her mother had unilateral amazia. In addition, the girl developed bilateral mature ovarian teratomas containing hair, sebaceous glands, and sweat glands.
614941	Munoz et al. (1997) identified 5 families with possible autosomal recessive HED on the basis of the presence of severely affected females and unaffected parents in single sibships and in highly consanguineous families with multiple affected family members. The disorder was excluded from the EDA locus on the X chromosome (305100) by the lack of its cosegregation with polymorphic markers flanking the EDA locus in 3 of the 5 families. No mutations of the EDA gene (300451) were detected by SSCP analysis in the 2 families not excluded by haplotype analysis. The appearance of affected males and females in autosomal recessive HED was clinically indistinguishable from that seen in males with X-linked HED. The findings of equally affected males and females in single sibships, as well as the presence of consanguinity, supported an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. The fact that phenotypically identical types of HED can be caused by mutations at both X-linked and autosomal loci is analogous to the situation in the mouse, where indistinguishable phenotypes are produced by mutations at both X-linked ('Tabby') and autosomal ('crinkled' and 'downless') loci. Chassaing et al. (2010) studied a 27-year-old woman from a consanguineous Moroccan family with dry eczematous skin and hyperpigmented areas on her forehead, cheeks, and chin. Scalp hair appeared late and was thin, brittle, and sparse. She had no axillary or pubic hair, and eyebrows and eyelashes were sparse. In childhood, only 1 primary tooth erupted, and no permanent teeth ever appeared. She had recurrent rhinitis with multiple respiratory infections. In addition, total absence of sweating was observed. Chaudhary et al. (2016) reported 2 sisters from a consanguineous Indian family with classic HED symptoms, including shiny dry skin, sparse scalp hair, absent eyebrows and eyelashes, and frequent episodes of high grade fever and otorrhea. Additional features included dry eyes, mucous membranes, and airways, with recurrent rhinitis and respiratory infections. Dental examination at ages 14 and 12 revealed hypodontia, with mostly peg-shaped teeth.
614944	Yariz et al. (2012) studied 3 brothers and a sister, born of consanguineous parents, who had symmetric moderate sensorineural hearing loss with no evidence of progression on available audiograms. Clinical examinations did not reveal additional findings, and CT scan of the temporal bone in 1 affected sib was normal. In 1 brother who reported a 3-month episode of dizziness at age 17 years, described as a few seconds of blurry vision caused by turning his head abruptly to the left, caloric tests revealed left-sided vestibular hypofunction. All positional tests produced persistent up-left nontorsional nystagmus with an average velocity of 7 degrees/sec without a sensation of vertigo. Yariz et al. (2012) also studied 3 brothers from an unrelated family with congenital moderate stable hearing loss, who performed normally in the Unterberger, Romberg, head-thrust, and head-shake tests as well as in eye-tracking movements, although a delay in gross motor development was reported. There were no abnormalities on physical examination or otoscopy, and high-resolution CT scan in 1 of the affected brothers did not reveal any abnormalities.
614945	Schraders et al. (2012) studied 4 sibs with nonsyndromic deafness, who all had flat to shallow U-shaped audiograms. Of the 4 affected sibs, 3 had delayed speech development, suggesting a prelingual onset of the hearing impairment, and 2 had delayed motor development, suggestive of vestibular problems at a young age. Rotary chair and caloric tests performed at the ages of 19 years, 17 years, 15 years, and 13 years in the 4 sibs, respectively, demonstrated vestibular hyporeflexia in all; CT scan in 1 sib revealed no inner ear abnormalities. Schraders et al. (2012) also studied 2 Spanish sibs with bilateral moderate sensorineural hearing impairment, in whom serial audiograms demonstrated nonprogression. The shape of their audiograms was slightly downsloping across all frequencies, and prelingual onset was suggested due to delayed speech development in both sibs. They had normal motor development and no dizziness or walking instability in adulthood. Oculomotor and rotatory chair testing by videonystagmography were normal in both sibs; however, bithermal caloric testing revealed a bilateral deficit consistent with subclinical vestibular dysfunction.
614946	Shamseldin et al. (2012) reported a consanguineous Saudi Arabian family in which 3 sibs had a severe mitochondrial encephalopathy. The proband was a 1.9-year-old girl with significant global developmental delay, lactic acidosis, and onset of uncontrolled seizures at age 35 days. Other features included poor feeding, poor physical growth with microcephaly (-2.4 SD), visual and hearing impairment, hypotonia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Laboratory studies showed high lactate, and muscle biopsy showed scattered fibers with intense NADH and SDH activity without ragged-red fibers or cytochrome c oxidase (COX)-negative fibers. Electron microscopy showed subtle mitochondrial abnormalities, but there was no deletion or depletion of mitochondrial DNA. Brain MRI showed diffuse cerebral atrophy, enlarged ventricles, and bilateral hyperintense T2-weighted lesions in the basal ganglia, consistent with Leigh syndrome (256000). There was no evidence of liver impairment. The overall picture suggested a defect in enzymes involved in oxidative phosphorylation. The proband had 2 affected sibs with developmental delay and seizures; both died before 3 months of age. Elo et al. (2012) provided some follow-up of the index patient reported by Shamseldin et al. (2012), who died at age 22 months. Elo et al. (2012) reported a Finnish family in which 2 sisters had a fatal infantile mitochondrial encephalopathy. The proband developed treatment-resistant myoclonic seizures on the second day of life. Laboratory studies showed generalized aminoaciduria and increased lactate in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid. Initial brain MRI and EEG were normal, but EEG at 6 weeks showed multifocal spikes and brain MRI at 3 months showed severe central and cortical atrophy with signal increases in the putamina. Liver biopsy showed enlarged hepatocytes, increased glycogen, and iron and copper accumulation, but transaminases were normal. Muscle biopsy showed decreased COX immunostaining and subsarcolemmal glycogen, but no ragged-red fibers. Complex I activity in muscle was increased compared to control values, but succinate dehydrogenase was 50% and COX was 16% of control. She had microcephaly and slightly coarse retinal pigmentation, but normal optic nerve. She had no psychomotor development, and died at age 8 months. Gel electrophoresis showed a severe reduction of complex IV in the brain and skeletal muscle and partial complex I deficiency in the brain; complex I in skeletal muscles was slightly increased. In contrast, defects in respiratory chain complexes were not observed in patient fibroblasts. Neuropathologic examination showed generalized atrophy with striking subtotal laminar necrosis of the cortical ribbon. There was microcystic degeneration, lack of pyramidal cells, reactive gliosis, and areas of spongiosis. Degenerative changes were observed in the cortex, cerebellum, and brainstem. The neuropathologic changes, together with the liver involvement, were reminiscent of Alpers syndrome (203700). The patient had an older sister with a similar disorder who died of multiorgan failure at age 21 months. Almalki et al. (2014) reported a 2.5-year-old boy, born of unrelated British Caucasian parents, with onset of severe seizures associated with hypsarrhythmia on EEG at age 6 months, followed by delayed psychomotor development. The seizures became refractory, and brain imaging showed subcortical white matter lesions and thinning of the corpus callosum. Other features included no visual awareness, increased limb tone, hyperreflexia, and mild dysmorphic features, including small anteriorly rotated ears and broad nasal root. Patient skeletal muscle and myoblasts showed an isolated complex IV deficiency, which was not observed in fibroblasts. Almalki et al. (2014) noted that the phenotype in their patient was slightly different from that reported by Shamseldin et al. (2012) and Elo et al. (2012). Chen et al. (2023) reported a patient who presented at 3 weeks of age with tachypnea, lactic acidosis, and a severe metabolic acidosis. He also had increased tone and a divergent squint. He developed loose stools and worsening acidosis. At 4 weeks of age, he developed liver dysfunction, and at 8 weeks of age he developed seizures. He died at 9 weeks of age. Walker et al. (2016) reported a girl with severe juvenile-onset epileptic encephalopathy. She had mildly delayed psychomotor development with speech delay, including walking at age 17 months, running at 24 months, and first word at age 3.5 years with a plateau of language skills at age 5 to 7 years. She had a first prolonged generalized tonic-clonic seizure at age 8 years, followed by progression of the epilepsy, which became refractory and associated with spike-wave discharges on EEG that also occurred during sleep. EEG also showed background slowing. She developed epilepsia partialis continua starting at age 10 years, and status epilepticus at age 13. Her neurologic status progressively declined: she was unable to follow commands or track faces, and she had unreactive pupils, near-continuous myoclonus of the right face, arm, and leg, absence of purposeful movement, and extensor plantar responses. Brain MRI showed extensive areas of T2-weighted hyperintensities. She died at age 15 years. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed type 2 fiber atrophy and myofibrillary disarray with enlarged and swollen mitochondria containing glycogen. Activities of complexes I-IV were normal in frozen skeletal muscle samples. Postmortem examination showed laminar cortical neuronal loss, necrosis, gliosis, and diminished subcortical white matter and descending corticospinal tracts. The most severely affected regions were the frontal and visual cortices. A small region of spongiform change was noted in the right thalamus. Genetic analysis identified compound heterozygous missense variants in the FARS2 gene (P85A and H135D) that occurred in the larger catalytic domain and were shown in in vitro studies to be detrimental to enzyme function. The findings expanded the phenotype associated with mutations in the FARS2 gene. Vantroys et al. (2017) reviewed the clinical descriptions and mutations reported in patients with COXPD14, which the authors called 'the epileptic phenotype,' and spastic paraplegia caused by mutations in the FARS2 gene.
614947	Tucker et al. (2011) reported 2 unrelated probands with combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency. The first patient presented at age 9 years with acquired strabismus and mildly decreased visual acuity. She had a history of mild developmental delay affecting speech and coordination, and also had reading difficulties. Brain MRI showed T2-weighted hyperintense lesions in several brain regions, including the lentiform nuclei, caudate, midbrain tectum, red nuclei, corpus callosum, and subcortical white matter. CSF lactate was increased, although blood lactate levels were normal. Echocardiography showed short PR waves and delta waves consistent with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. At age 21 years, she worked a menial job. Family history revealed a maternal first cousin with a similar but more severe disorder. That patient had global developmental delay, optic atrophy, impaired vision, pyramidal tract signs, incoordination, and Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. In a second family, a girl was first evaluated for obesity at age 5 years and was found to have a pituitary adenoma. Brain MRI also showed bilateral signal abnormalities in the putamen, globus pallidus, and brainstem. There was progression of these lesions to include white matter changes. Serum and CSF lactate were elevated. She developed seizures, acute neurologic decompensation, and died several months later. Tissue samples and cell lines from all the patients showed deficiencies of complexes I and IV, with deficient complex III in some samples. There was no evidence of mtDNA depletion. Patient fibroblasts showed reduced levels of most mtDNA-encoded proteins, suggesting a defect in mitochondrial translation. Neeve et al. (2013) reported 2 German sisters, born of unrelated parents, with COXPD15. Both patients had developmental delay, affecting speech more than motor skills, and hypotonia. The older sister, aged 16 years, had short stature, slight dysarthria, mild ataxia, and clumsy fine finger movements. Brain MRI showed mild signal abnormalities in the dorsal periventricular white matter and increased T2-weighted signal intensities in the caudate and putamen, consistent with Leigh syndrome (256000). The younger sister, aged 6 years, had short stature and mild intention tremor, but no ataxia. Brain MRI was normal. Both girls had mild cognitive dysfunction and poor speech. Skeletal muscle analysis of the older sister showed mild lipid accumulation in type 1 fibers, but no ragged-red fibers. Activities of mitochondrial complexes I and IV were decreased compared to normal; complexes II and III were normal. Haack et al. (2014) reported 9 patients from 8 unrelated families with COXPD15. The phenotype was variable in severity, but all had an encephalomyopathic phenotype with onset in infancy or early childhood of delayed psychomotor development and subsequent retardation, gait ataxia, and hypotonia. Seven patients had microcephaly. Other features observed in some patients included nystagmus and spasticity. Laboratory studies showed increased serum and CSF lactate, often with increased alanine. Muscle biopsies showed mitochondrial complex I deficiency (range, 7 to 89% of normal), with some also showing complex IV deficiency (range, 45% to normal). Seven patients had abnormal increased T2-weighted signal abnormalities in the basal ganglia and/or midbrain, consistent with classic Leigh syndrome, and some had additional subcortical white matter lesions. None of the patients had severe involvement of other organs, although several had ventricular septal defect or thickening of the ventricular septum. Two patients died in early childhood, some showed episodic decompensation, and others were able to attend special school or do supervised shelter work. One patient was wheelchair-bound with spastic quadriplegia in his twenties.
614959	Coppola et al. (1995) first delineated MMPSI as a clinical entity. Fourteen infants presented at a mean age of 3 months with nearly continuous multifocal seizures involving both cerebral hemispheres. The seizures usually started as focal motor seizures and often showed secondary generalization. Autonomic manifestations, such as apnea, cyanosis, or flushing, were common. The seizures were refractory and became very frequent over the first few months, becoming almost continuous. EEG showed discharges randomly involving multiple independent sites and moving from one cortical area to another. The pattern tended to consist of rhythmic alpha or theta activity that spread to involve an increasing area of the cortical surface. The patients showed developmental regression and became quadriplegic with severe axial hypotonia. Three patients died at ages 7 months, 7 years, and 8 years. Neuropathologic examination of the brain in 2 cases showed severe hippocampal neuronal loss and accompanying gliosis. There was no familial recurrence of a similar disorder, although some had a family history of seizures. In the 2 patients in whom seizure control was obtained, motor and cognitive abilities were partially recovered. Wilmshurst et al. (2000) reported 2 unrelated infants with MMPSI. The first was a girl who presented at age 3 weeks with eye opening, staring, eyelid flickering, and twitching of the limbs. The seizures were refractory to treatment. From 8 weeks on, she had multiple types of seizures often with secondary generalization. The seizures continued to be frequent and she remained hospitalized until age 6 months. She showed no developmental progress since the onset of seizures, had truncal hypotonia and limb spasticity, and was drowsy and unresponsive. Extensive laboratory workup found no etiology for the seizures. EEG reflected the escalation of seizure activity, with great variability in the site of onset, multiple seizures arising from the same region, and spreading of the seizures to adjacent brain regions. She died of pneumonia at age 9 months. The second patient was a boy who showed normal development until the onset of refractory seizures at age 3 months. He had multiple seizure types, including facial twitching, eye deviation, limb jerking, and secondary generalization. He was hypotonic with hyperreflexia and clonus. EEG showed multifocal epileptogenic foci on a slow background. He died at age 12 months. Wilmshurst et al. (2000) emphasized the extremely poor prognosis of patients with this form of infantile-onset seizures. Marsh et al. (2005) retrospectively reviewed the clinical course of 6 unrelated infants with early-onset intractable seizures that alternated between the cerebral hemispheres and were consistent with MMPSI. Seizures often occurred multiple times a day. After seizure onset, the patients showed a plateau or decline in psychomotor development, and about half showed progressive microcephaly. Interictal EEG varied from normal to slow, with multifocal sharp waves. The onset of seizures in 4 patients had evolving rhythmic sharp activity in the theta to alpha frequency range. Ictal onset varied from side to side and within each hemisphere; many showed a migratory pattern. Five patients were available for follow-up. Of these, only 1 showed profound psychomotor retardation, whereas the others were less severely disabled. One 6-year-old child could walk and talk and showed learning disabilities. These findings suggested that the outcome of the disorder may not be as poor as suggested by the original report of Coppola et al. (1995). Lee et al. (2012) reported a Korean boy who presented at age 2 months with refractory multifocal partial seizures. The seizures occurred in clusters up to 10 times a day. EEG showed migrating multifocal epileptiform activity, consistent with a clinical diagnosis of MMPSI. At age 9 months he had epileptic spasms, and EEG showed hypsarrhythmia, consistent with a clinical diagnosis of West syndrome. He developed progressive microcephaly and showed severe neurologic impairment with poor visual following and generalized hypotonia. The finding suggested that both MMPSI and West syndrome represent a phenotypic continuum of infantile epileptic encephalopathy and probably share a common pathophysiology relating to hyperexcitability. Barcia et al. (2012) reported 6 unrelated patients with MMPSI due to heterozygous mutations in the KCNT1 gene (614959.0001-614959.0004). All patients had onset of refractory focal seizures and arrest of psychomotor development in the first 2 months of life. The seizures showed secondary generalization in some patients. Brain MRI of most patients showed delayed myelination, cortical atrophy, and thin corpus callosum. Other features included poor or no eye contact, lack of speech and walking, and microcephaly. The oldest patients were 10 years old at the time of the study and showed profound psychomotor retardation. Vanderver et al. (2014) reported a child with leukoencephalopathy and severe epilepsy. He presented at age 1 month with refractory myoclonic seizures that progressed to several different seizure types, including status epilepticus. He had microcephaly and encephalopathic encephalopathy, with severe developmental stagnation and abnormal involuntary movements. Brain imaging showed severely delayed myelination, and EEG showed background slowing with superimposed multifocal interictal sharp discharges and occasional periods of burst-suppression. Ishii et al. (2013) reported 2 unrelated girls with DEE14 presenting as malignant migrating partial seizures in infancy. Both girls had onset of focal seizures at 2 months of age, following apparently normal development. The seizures occurred 20 to 30 times a day and were refractory to treatment. Interictal EEGs showed asynchronous high-voltage slow activities with multifocal spikes. Ictal EEGs demonstrated either focal or multifocal seizure activity that often migrated to other areas. Both patients had hypotonia and severely delayed psychomotor development with lack of head control and lack of visual following.
614961	Mochida et al. (2012) reported 6 patients from 3 unrelated families with pontocerebellar hypoplasia. One consanguineous family was of Peruvian origin and the 2 other families were from Puerto Rico. The patients showed early developmental delay in motor, speech, and cognition. Although most were born with a normal head size, all but 1 developed postnatal microcephaly (-2 to -4.4 SD). Some learned to walk later in childhood, whereas some did not achieve independent walking or even sitting. Most had hypotonia with limb spasticity, variable hyperreflexia, ataxic gait, and involuntary movements, particularly of the head. Other features included claw foot deformities, equinocavovarus, and poor overall growth; 2 patients had more severe joint contractures. Ocular abnormalities ranged from myopia, astigmatism, esotropia, and nystagmus to cortical visual impairment and lack of visual tracking. All had poor social interaction and very poor cognitive development. Two patients had mild dysmorphic features, 2 had esophageal reflux, and 1 had hypertrichosis. Brain MRI of all patients showed a small cerebellum, thin brainstem with short pons and long medulla, decreased cerebral white matter, and a thin corpus callosum. There was relative preservation of the cerebellar folia. These changes did not appear to be progressive and were more consistent with a developmental rather than a degenerative process.
614962	Montague et al. (1997) described 2 morbidly obese cousins, an 8-year-old girl and a 2-year-old boy, from an inbred Pakistani kindred. Although of normal weight at birth, both children suffered from severe, intractable obesity from an early age. The children had no additional clinical features to suggest that they might have a pleiotropic genetic syndrome associated with obesity. Montague et al. (1997) found that serum leptin levels in both patients were very low despite their markedly elevated fat mass. The female patient weighed 86 kg at the age of 8 years, with 57% body fat and height of 137 cm. Her birth weight had been normal, but she gained weight rapidly in the early postnatal period and was clearly outside the normal range by 4 months of age. As the result of her obesity she developed abnormalities of growth in the long bones of the legs, resulting in the need for corrective orthopedic surgery. She underwent liposuction of lower limb fat at the age of 6 years in an attempt to improve her mobility. Her affected cousin, a male aged 2 years, had a weight of 29 kg, with 54% body fat. He had difficulty in walking because of extreme obesity. He likewise was of normal weight at birth but rapidly became obese, deviating far above the normal range by 3 months of age. Both children had a clear history of marked hyperphagia, being noted from early infancy to be constantly hungry, demanding food continuously, and eating considerably more than their sibs. Thus, in both mice and humans, congenital leptin deficiency is associated with normal birth weight followed by rapid development of severe obesity associated with hyperphagia and impaired satiety. Detailed assessment of energy expenditure in these children had not been performed, although their mean body temperatures were within the normal range. Since they were prepubertal, it was impossible to determine whether they would show hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with sterility, which is found in ob/ob mice; serum concentrations of luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, estradiol, and testosterone were at prepubertal levels. In contrast to ob/ob mice, which are markedly hypercortisolemic, plasma cortisol levels in both children were within the reference range. Fasting plasma glucose was normal in both children, but fasting insulin levels were elevated in the older child, consistent with the hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance seen in ob/ob mice. None of the 4 heterozygous parents nor the one heterozygous sib was morbidly obese, a finding consistent with the absence of severe obesity in the murine heterozygotes. Farooqi et al. (1999) followed up on the older of the 2 cousins described by Montague et al. (1997), then 9 years of age. She had marked hyperphagia, was constantly hungry, demanded food continually, and was disruptive when denied food. As a result of her severe obesity, valgus deformities of the legs developed, for which she required bilateral proximal tibial osteotomies. When she was 6 years old, liposuction was performed to remove fat from her legs. Although there were no normative data for a child of this weight, there was no evidence of substantial impairment in her basal or total energy expenditure, and her body temperature was normal, which is not the case in ob/ob mice, whose oxygen consumption, energy expenditure, and body temperature are low (Trayhurn et al., 1977). Thus, leptin may be less central to the regulation of energy expenditure in humans than in mice. Another difference in all humans with either leptin or leptin receptor mutations is the consistently normal glucocorticoid concentrations, in contrast to the marked excess in ob/ob mice. Farooqi et al. (2002) described a third child with leptin deficiency, from a consanguineous family of Pakistani origin living in the United Kingdom. Leptin deficiency was associated with reduced numbers of circulating CD4+ T cells and impaired T cell proliferation and cytokine release, all of which were reversed by recombinant human leptin administration. Gibson et al. (2004) reported a child of consanguineous Pakistani parents in Canada who presented with severe hyperphagia and obesity. The family originated from the same area of Pakistan as the 2 United Kingdom families reported by Montague et al. (1997) and Farooqi et al. (2002), but was not known to be related over 4 generations. Four years of therapy with subcutaneous injections of recombinant leptin had dramatically beneficial effects on weight, appetite, metabolism, and neuroendocrine phenotypes and was associated with clinical improvement in asthma and recurrent infections. Biochemical hypothyroidism, which was persistent before treatment, was completely reversed by leptin therapy. Infertility due to hypothalamic-pituitary hormone insufficiency is a feature of leptin-deficient ob/ob mice. Two of the homozygous individuals in the Turkish kindred of Strobel et al. (1998) were adults. One had primary amenorrhea; the male homozygote never entered puberty and had clinical features of hypogonadism: no beard, scanty pubic and axillary hair, bilateral gynecomastia, and small penis and testes. Testosterone rose after administration of human chorionic gonadotropin (see 118860) in the latter patient, and normal responses to gonadotropin-releasing hormone (152760) were also demonstrated. As in ob/ob mice, a sympathetic system dysfunction (low sympathetic tone) was observed in the propositus. The cold pressor test elicited an abnormally small response in systolic and diastolic blood pressures, and orthostatic hypotension was demonstrated. The phenotype of these adult patients suggested that leptin not only controls body mass but also is a necessary signal for the initiation of human puberty. Ozata et al. (1999) analyzed endocrine, sympathetic, and immune function in 4 homozygous patients from the 5-generation consanguineous Turkish kindred with leptin deficiency, morbid obesity, and hypogonadism that was originally reported by Strobel et al. (1998). Heterozygous individuals in this family had normal weight. All 4 obese patients showed sympathetic system dysfunction, whereas heterozygous relatives did not. The patients also exhibited alterations in growth hormone (GH1; 139250), although their heights were not less than those of unaffected relatives. Parathyroid hormone (PTH; 168450)-calcium function was disturbed, with 1 patient (the only male) showing decreased bone mineral density. Despite their obesity, these patients did not exhibit risk factors for cardiovascular disease, such as hypertension, impaired lipid metabolism, or hyperglycemia. Ozata et al. (1999) noted that the 19 normal-weight individuals in this family were alive, whereas 7 of 11 obese individuals had died in childhood after infections, suggesting that the LEP mutation severely impairs key biologic functions during childhood with negative impact on survival. The oldest homozygous female patient started to menstruate at age 35 years, whereas the younger adult subjects were still hypogonadic. The authors concluded that humans who survive the negative effects of leptin deficiency during childhood can, in contrast to ob/ob mice, eventually compensate for some of the effects of leptin deficiency on immunity and endocrine function. Wabitsch et al. (2015) studied a Turkish boy with early-onset extreme obesity who presented with a weight of 33.7 kg (BMI, 38.6) at 2.5 years of age. He was of normal weight at birth, but rapid weight gain started in the postnatal period. His parents reported food-seeking behavior, and he exhibited hyperphagia in an ad libitum test meal. He had a history of recurrent ear and pulmonary infections, requiring 2 intensive-care hospitalizations for severe pneumonia. Laboratory evaluation revealed an elevated serum leptin level but normal T-lymphocyte counts, subpopulation ratios, and function. The patient responded to the administration of exogenous metreleptin with a rapid change in eating behavior and a corresponding decrease in weight, from 43 to 35 kg, and in BMI, from 44 to 34. Funcke et al. (2023) reported 2 unrelated children with severe early-onset obesity and mutation in the LEP gene. Patient A was a 14-year-old European boy born of second-cousin parents, and patient B was a 2-year-old girl born of first-cousin parents. Both exhibited characteristics of leptin dysfunction, including intense hyperphagia, impaired satiety, and severe early-onset obesity, with high circulating levels of leptin. Patient A also showed subtle hypogonadism with delayed pubertal development, although he demonstrated a normal response in a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (see GNRH1, 152760) stimulation test. Patient B experienced recurrent upper respiratory infections, although her lymphocyte count was normal, with a normal lymphocyte subpopulation distribution.
614963	Clement et al. (1998) described a consanguineous family of Kabylian (Berber of northern Algeria) origin in which 3 of 9 sibs had morbid obesity with onset in early childhood. The affected sisters had normal birth weights, but developed severe obesity in the first months of life. They showed abnormal eating behaviors resembling those seen in Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS; 176270) and in individuals with anatomic damage of the hypothalamic area; behavior included fighting with other children for food, impulsivity, and stubbornness. Psychologic testing showed emotional lability and social disability, but no mental retardation. Core temperature and glucose metabolism were normal, as were ACTH and cortisol, but growth hormone and thyrotropin levels were low. The girls did not spontaneously develop puberty and had low estradiol, LH, and FSH levels consistent with central hypogonadism. These results suggested that leptin (164160) and the leptin receptor are important physiologic regulators of several endocrine functions in humans. Clement et al. (1998) considered their results to indicate that leptin is an important physiologic regulator of several endocrine functions in humans. Farooqi et al. (2007) identified 7 homozygotes for mutations in the LEPR gene among 300 patients with hyperphagia and severe early-onset obesity, including 90 probands from consanguineous families. Affected individuals were characterized by hyperphagia, severe obesity, alterations in immune function, and delayed puberty due to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Serum leptin levels were within the range predicted by the elevated fat mass in these patients. Their clinical features were less severe than those of patients with congenital leptin deficiency (614962). Dehghani et al. (2018) reported a large consanguineous family in which 9 members, aged 3 to 36 years, had severe early-onset obesity. All affected members had normal head circumference and weight at birth. Weight gain occurred rapidly shortly after birth, leading to severe obesity in early infancy. Affected members had marked hyperphagia and aggressive food-seeking behaviors. No abnormalities were observed on clinical examination, and development and height were normal. Affected members also had an increased rate of intestinal and respiratory tract infections and a longer period of recovery from these infections. The 2 affected adult females had extremely high body mass index and hypogonadal infertility, whereas the body mass index of the 2 affected adult males declined around onset of puberty with preservation of fertility. Dehghani et al. (2018) suggested that there might be a gender-specific effect on body weight regulation in patients with this condition.
614969	Mahbubul Huq and Nigro (2000) reported an 8-year-old girl with developmental delay, spasticity, and XY sex reversal. She was noted to have ambiguous genitalia at birth, with microphallus, fused scrotum, absence of the uterus, high vaginal opening, and gonadal agenesis with presence of structures characterized by oviducts and vas deferens; karyotype was XY, but she was raised as a female after gonadectomy. She had mild dysmorphic features, including flattened nasal bridge, epicanthal folds, upslanting palpebral fissures, large ears, and high-arched palate. At 11 months of age, she showed developmental delay, hypotonia, and hyperreflexia. Brain imaging showed olivopontocerebellar hypoplasia and thin corpus callosum. She was nonverbal at age 8 years. Mutation analysis of the SRY gene (480000) did not show any abnormalities. Anderson et al. (2011) reported a male infant, born of unrelated Caucasian parents, with primary hypogonadism and pontocerebellar hypoplasia. At birth, he was noted to have labioscrotal folds with rugosity, no palpable gonads, and small phallus. There were no notable dysmorphic features. Karyotype was 46,XY and pelvic ultrasound showed no mullerian structures or inguinal gonads. Laboratory studies at age 12 weeks showed increased baseline gonadotropins and no testosterone response to hCG, confirming functional anorchia. At this age, developmental delay was apparent: he had hypotonia and did not fix and follow or smile. Head circumference was -1.47 SD. Other features included apneic episodes, tonic-clonic seizures, irritability, and poor spontaneous movements. Brain MRI showed severe pontocerebellar hypoplasia/atrophy, enlarged ventricles, and reduced periventricular white matter. At 19 weeks, he showed marked regression of penile corporeal tissue, resulting in genitalia that appeared female, and head circumference had decreased to -2.54 SD. He showed progressive deterioration in respiratory drive and died at age 5.5 months. Postmortem examination showed cerebral atrophy with rudimentary white matter and absence of corresponding projection fibers in the descending tracts. The ventricular lining was almost devoid of ependymal cells and there was subependymal gliosis. The cerebellar hemispheres were virtually absent and had few folia that lacked neurons. Tissue from the genital area showed no gonadal tissue. Genetic investigation of several candidate genes, including ARX (300382), TSEN54 (608755), TSEN34 (608754), and RARS2 (611524), revealed no abnormalities. Siriwardena et al. (2013) reported a 3-year-old child with significantly delayed psychomotor development, poor overall growth, and truncal hypotonia with peripheral hyperreflexia. Dysmorphic features included flat occiput, nevus flammeus on the forehead, prominent supraorbital ridges, and broad nasal root and bridge. She also had intermittent esotropia. Brain imaging showed pontocerebellar hypoplasia and delayed myelination. Her external genitalia were female, but microarray analysis showed 46,XY. Pelvic imaging and laparoscopy showed normal uterus, bilateral Fallopian tubes, blind-ending vagina, and no gonadal tissue. No genetic abnormalities affecting the SRY, ATRX (300032), or DHCR7 (602858) were detected, and extensive metabolic investigations were normal. Siriwardena et al. (2013) noted that another patient with this disorder had been reported by Budde et al. (2008) as part of a larger cohort of patients with pontocerebellar hypoplasia. The patient in that report (case Bx1) had 46,XY sex reversal, chorea/dystonia, and a swallowing disorder. No further information regarding the gonadal histopathologic findings or growth and development were available. Lardelli et al. (2017) reported 13 patients from 11 unrelated families with PCH7. Two of the patients had previously been reported by Anderson et al. (2011) and Siriwardena et al. (2013). Five of the families were consanguineous, of Egyptian, Turkish, and Moroccan origin. Five patients were deceased, and several had deceased affected sibs. The living patients ranged in age from 2 to 29 years. Common dysmorphic features included microcephaly, large ears, and high-arched palate; more variable dysmorphic features included epicanthal folds, prominent upper lip, micrognathia, and broad nasal root. Patients had developmental delay and intellectual disability, accompanied in some by additional neurologic signs, including hypertonia with spasticity, abnormal movements, myoclonus, nystagmus, optic atrophy, and seizures. Many patients also had hypotonia with muscle weakness, atrophy, and fasciculations. Brain imaging showed abnormalities of the cerebrum and corpus callosum, pontocerebellar and brainstem hypoplasia, and white matter abnormalities. All but 1 female patient had abnormalities of the genitalia, including prominent clitoris, ambiguous genitalia, micropenis or absence of penis, and undescended testes.
614970	Srour et al. (2012) reported 3 patients from 2 unrelated French Canadian families with Joubert syndrome. The patients were 14, 9, and 4 years old, respectively. All had developmental delay and were nonverbal and nonambulatory. Other features included oculomotor apraxia, breathing abnormalities, and the molar tooth sign on brain MRI. Two had postaxial polydactyly, 2 had retinal involvement, and 2 had renal cysts with normal renal function. Two sibs in 1 family showed significant aggressive behavior and self-mutilation.
614972	De Vree et al. (1998) reported a woman of North African descent who developed recurrent episodes of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. Her son had severe PFIC3 necessitating liver transplant. Jacquemin et al. (1999) reported a family in which 6 women had ICP characterized by pruritus and abnormal liver function tests with a cholestatic pattern in the third trimester. Fetal death occurred in 3 cases. Cholestasis disappeared spontaneously and progressively after delivery. Rosmorduc et al. (2001) reported a 23-year-old woman who developed cholestasis and biliary pain during pregnancy and delivered a premature infant. She later underwent cholecystectomy, but had recurrence of cholestasis and biliary pain during her second pregnancy and lost the fetus. She had intrahepatic gallstones and bile analysis showed cholesterol crystals. The patient's son developed acute cholangitis with intra- and extrahepatic cholesterol gallstones in his twenties, consistent with GBD1 (600803). The proband's father and aunt had biliary pain associated with cholesterol biliary gallstones. Rosmorduc et al. (2001) reported a 22-year-old woman who presented with cholestatic liver disease after she started taking oral contraceptives. She had multiple small gallstones in the intrahepatic bile ducts. After discontinuation of the oral contraceptives, her symptoms resolved rapidly, but liver enzymes remained elevated. She underwent cholecystectomy, but later developed ICP and gave birth to a premature baby. Liver biopsy showed portal inflammation, fibrosis, ductal proliferation, and cholestasis. Treatment with UDCA resulted in normalization of liver enzymes, but pruritus and increased liver enzymes were observed 15 days after discontinuation of UDCA. Pasmant et al. (2012) reported a 26-year-old woman who presented with biliary pain, jaundice, and elevated liver enzymes associated with taking oral contraceptives. Liver biopsy showed ductular proliferation. She was free of symptoms in the absence of oral contraception ingestion and later had a normal pregnancy and delivery under UDCA treatment.
614974	Prescott et al. (2006) described 3 unrelated children, a girl and 2 boys, with distinctive facial skin lesions present at birth, consisting of 2 to 3 well-circumscribed round or oval vesicular lesions, 0.5 cm to 1 cm in diameter, located along an arc on each cheek from the top of the ear to the corner of the mouth. The infant girl, born of healthy unrelated Flemish parents, had 3 skin lesions containing a small amount of fluid on each cheek as well as unilateral cleft lip and palate and a cutaneous hemangioma in the left palm. One of the infant boys, born of healthy unrelated Norwegian parents, had 2 preauricular lesions noted on both cheeks at birth; those deflated and were followed by eruption of a new, more medial, lesion on each cheek at 2 to 3 weeks of age. The lesions subsequently remained unchanged and were encircled by long, fine hairs. The other infant boy was born of healthy unrelated Dutch parents and had symmetric atrophic skin lesions on both cheeks at birth that persisted with a lanugo-like collar; he also had mildly cupped ears, a small chin, and a congenital nevus on the left foot. The girl and the Dutch boy had normal development, but the Norwegian boy had neurologic complications that were the sequelae of an unexplained left-sided intracranial perinatal hemorrhage. Microscopic examination of a biopsied lesion in the Norwegian boy showed fragmentation of elastic fibers with striation and a diffuse increase in mast cells in the dermis, consistent with nonreactive deep and superficial elastolysis. Cervantes-Barragan et al. (2011) classified the FFDD phenotype in the 3 sibs (2 boys and 1 girl) reported by Kowalski and Fenske (1992) as FFDD4. The parents were first cousins. Slavotinek et al. (2013) studied a 6-year-old girl and her 4-year-old brother who were born with bilateral blister-like lesions on the cheeks, extending from the ear down to the lateral commissures of the mouth, which filled with fluid daily during the first few years of life. Both sibs were later noted to have several intraoral polypoid lesions, measuring 1 cm to 2 cm, on the left buccal mucosa. At the time of examination, the girl's skin lesions were hypopigmented macules, whereas her brother's were rounded with a small center of cutis aplasia, bordered by a hyperpigmented rim with long thin fine hairs; the brother also had a small area of sparse hair growth in front of both ears. The remainder of the dermatologic examination was normal, except for numerous scattered dark brown nevi in the sister. She also had a history of multiple dental extractions and root canal surgery for dental caries. Their unrelated parents had normal skin and family history was negative for significant skin findings. Slavotinek et al. (2013) also studied an unrelated Belgian girl who at birth was noted to have symmetric preauricular ivory round-to-oval patches with an atrophic aspect; there were no other abnormalities, and the skin lesions remained stable after birth.
614976	Altunhan et al. (2011) described a Turkish boy who was born with acrocephaly and a peculiar facies characterized by frontal bossing. Digital abnormalities included clinodactyly of the fifth fingers, membranous syndactyly of fingers 3 and 4, syndactyly of toes 1 and 2, and preaxial polydactyly of the big toes bilaterally. Other abnormalities included widely spaced nipples and bilateral cryptorchidism. On cardiac auscultation, heart sounds were best heard at the right intersternal border, and chest radiograph revealed dextrocardia; echocardiography did not demonstrate any other cardiac abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasound revealed that the liver was in the left upper quadrant and the spleen was in the right upper quadrant. No brain abnormalities were detected on MRI; skull x-rays and 3D CT showed metopic anterior and posterior sagittal synostosis. Altunhan et al. (2011) stated that this was the first report of Carpenter syndrome in association with situs inversus totalis. Twigg et al. (2012) studied 5 patients with mutation in the MEGF8 gene and a phenotype closely resembling classic Carpenter syndrome (CRPT1; 201000). One of the patients was the Turkish boy previously described by Altunhan et al. (2011). In both phenotypes, the spectrum of limb anomalies was similar and consisted of brachydactyly, syndactyly, and preaxial polydactyly. Other common features included a tendency toward high birth weight and childhood obesity and the occurrence of cryptorchidism or undescended testes in males. However, craniosynostosis tended to be less severe in the CRPT2 patients and usually involved only the metopic suture; this was frequently accompanied by a paradoxical hypertelorism, associated with a distinctive dysmorphic facies comprising a broad depressed nasal bridge, epicanthus, upslanted palpebral fissures, highly arched eyebrows, and low-set poorly angulated ears. Defects of lateralization were present in at least 3 of the patients and ranged from transposition of the great arteries to dextrocardia to complete situs inversus. The remaining 2 patients were Saudi Arabian brothers who were both diagnosed with diaphragmatic eventration and central position of the liver, but their clinical information was incomplete. Wide-spaced, hypoplastic, and/or supernumerary nipples and thoracic skeletal abnormalities appeared to be more characteristic in CRPT2 patients, whereas umbilical hernia and genu valgum, prominent features in CRPT1, were less characteristic in CRPT2.
614979	Tantravahi et al. (2012) studied a mother and 2 daughters, who were half-sisters, who had massive splenomegaly, cytopenia, anhidrosis, chronic optic nerve edema, and vision loss. The patients presented in the first decade of life with chronic optic nerve edema followed by slowly progressive vision loss, particularly central, and loss of color vision. In all cases, despite continued optic nerve head edema, lumbar puncture did not show elevated pressure. Although uveitis was seen in 2 patients, it was not present at all exams and testing for common causes of uveitis was negative. Disease progression was similar to a cone or cone-rod dystrophy, with electroretinography (ERG) showing loss of photopic (cone) responses with maintenance of scotopic (rod) responses into the teenage years in 2 patients; however, by ages 15 years to early twenties, all 3 patients had completely extinguished full-field ERGs. In addition, splenomegaly and mild pancytopenia developed in all 3 patients, at ages 9, 12, and 15 years; bone marrow evaluations were normal and splenectomy normalized their complete blood count values, indicating that the cytopenias were due to splenic sequestration. Splenic pathology showed congestion without infiltration or extramedullary hematopoiesis. Both daughters also reported migraine headaches and anhidrosis, and 1 also had episodic urticaria. Immunologic and autoimmune evaluations were negative. Williams et al. (2019) restudied the family from Utah (family 1) with splenomegaly, cytopenia, and vision loss that was originally reported by Tantravahi et al. (2012), and ascertained 5 more similarly affected families, including 1 family from Australia (family 2), 1 from the Netherlands (family 3), 1 from Virginia (family 4), and 1 from Delaware (family 5). In the 16 affected individuals, the most frequent earliest feature was decreased vision associated with optic nerve edema, evident as early as 4 years of age and present by age 12 years in all cases. Low-grade ocular inflammation, unresponsive to steroids or other forms of immunosuppression, was common in affected individuals. In later childhood or in the second decade of life, patients had increasing visual impairment, with abnormal cone function and later loss of rod function in most. By the third decade of life, visual dysfunction was severe with visual acuity ranging from counting fingers to no light perception. In addition to the ocular findings, patients generally had splenomegaly, beginning in the first or second decade of life; 1 patient underwent splenectomy. Hematologic assessment showed chronic mild pancytopenia, which was sometimes exacerbated during periods of viral or other infection. Peripheral smears frequently showed leukopenia with reactive lymphocytosis; bone marrow was normocellular with trilineage hematopoiesis and relative erythroid hyperplasia. Affected individuals also experienced anhidrosis, and migrainous headache was a frequent feature, often associated with episodic fever and back pain. Mild renal impairment was present in some members of family 2, but was not a consistent feature in all patients. Williams et al. (2019) designated the disorder 'ROSAH syndrome' based on the retinopathy, optic nerve edema, splenomegaly, anhidrosis, and migraine headache observed in these patients. Zhong et al. (2020) described 2 unrelated Chinese girls with ROSAH syndrome. In addition to retinal dystrophy, papilledema, splenomegaly, and pancytopenia, both experienced intermittent febrile episodes and were anhidrotic. One patient had undergone elective splenectomy due to concerns about spontaneous rupture, and splenectomy was planned in the other patient. Kozycki et al. (2022) reported clinical features in 27 patients with ROSAH syndrome. Almost all patients had inflammatory features, including fever, malaise, episodic abdominal pain, headache, cytopenia, and/or retinal vasculitis. Ophthalmologic findings in the cohort included optic nerve elevation, uveitis, retinal vasculitis, and retinal degeneration. Twenty patients had arthralgias, which started in childhood in some patients. Fourteen patients had gastrointestinal symptoms, including pain, gastroesophageal reflux, dysphagia, and/or reflux. Thirteen patients had recurrent headaches, and 7 patients had brain abnormalities seen on brain MRI, including calcification of the globi pallidi, red nucleus, and substantia nigra. Dental abnormalities included multiple caries in 23 patients and enamel defects in 7 patients; 5 patients were edentulous. Almost all patients had hyperhidrosis or anhidrosis, and 4 parous women had dysfunctional breast milk production. Laboratory findings included variably elevated C-reactive protein (CRP; 123260), transient neutropenia, and cytopenias.
614980	Thienpont et al. (2010) described 2 patients with multiple types of congenital heart defects who were found to have a mutation in the TAB2 gene. One patient was a woman with left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, subaortic stenosis due to a fibromuscular shelf, residual aortic regurgitation, and atrial fibrillation; she died from heart failure at 61 years of age. The other patient was a man with a bicuspid aortic valve and aortic dilation. Weiss et al. (2015) reported a 3-generation family in which 4 individuals had congenital heart defects. The proband was a female infant who was noted at birth to have tetralogy of Fallot, short-segment pulmonary atresia, large malalignment ventricular septal defect, and small atrial septal defect. The mitral and tricuspid valves were both prolapsed, with thickened and myxomatous leaflets. The proband's 32-year-old mother was diagnosed at age 2 years with bicuspid aortic valve and ventricular septal defect. Echocardiogram in adulthood also showed mild aortic valve stenosis and mildly prolapsing myxomatous mitral and tricuspid valves. The 66-year-old maternal grandmother was diagnosed at age 13 years with mitral regurgitation due to a myxomatous and prolapsed valve, for which she underwent valve replacement at age 22. Echocardiography later showed a myxomatous and prolapsed tricuspid valve, and she also had atrial fibrillation. Family history revealed that the grandmother's first pregnancy resulted in a male stillbirth; autopsy showed bicuspid aortic valve and aortic stenosis, as well as hydrops fetalis. Ackerman et al. (2016) studied a 12-year-old boy who was born with mild pulmonary valve stenosis and mild aortic root dilatation, as well as atrial and ventricular septal defects and patent ductus arteriosus that were closed surgically at age 2 months. By 1 year of age, all 4 valves appeared slightly thickened and abnormal in appearance, with bileaflet mitral valve prolapse and trileaflet aortic regurgitation, consistent with polyvalvular syndrome. Chest x-ray showed right atrial enlargement, and electrocardiogram was consistent with right ventricular hypertrophy. Other features included hypotonia, mild facial dysmorphism, myopia, soft pale skin, and joint hypermobility. His family history was negative for congenital heart disease. Ritelli et al. (2018) reported a sister (patient 1) and brother (patient 3) and the brother's daughter (patient 2), who had multiple congenital heart defects as well as features of a collagen tissue disorder. The affected individuals exhibited polyvalvular heart disease; generalized joint hypermobility and related musculoskeletal complications; soft, velvety, and hyperextensible skin; short limbs; hearing impairment; and facial dysmorphism. In addition to valvular dystrophy and insufficiency, patient 1 had an atrial septal aneurysm, patient 2 had myocardial noncompaction and bicuspid aortic valve, and patient 3 had aortic root dilatation. Both sibs also showed dilated cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias. Patient 3 died suddenly at age 60, likely due to cardiac arrhythmia. Chen et al. (2020) described a large Chinese family in which 8 members over 3 generations had congenital heart disease, primarily valvular defects. Affected individuals reported tachypnea, shortness of breath, and fatigue. The proband (II:5) had mild aortic stenosis as well as mild mitral, tricuspid, and aortic valve regurgitation. Atrial septal aneurysms were detected in her 3 affected sisters (II:1, II:7, and II:9); other abnormalities included mild mitral valve prolapse with mitral and pulmonic regurgitation in 1 sister (II:7), and left atrial and ventricular dilatation in another (II:9). One sister (II:7) also had a 3-year-old son (III:11) who was diagnosed with mild left ventricular and right atrial dilatation as well as mild mitral valve prolapse with regurgitation. The 4 sisters' mother had died in her late 50s due to sudden cardiac arrhythmia. The proband had a daughter with biventricular dilatation who experienced sudden cardiac death at age 2 years. The proband's second pregnancy showed no heartbeat at 9 weeks' gestation and was terminated, and a third pregnancy resulted in an unaffected daughter. The proband was pregnant at the time of the study; fetal echocardiography at 15 weeks' gestation showed no cardiac abnormality, but genetic analysis of fetal amniocytes revealed that the fetus carried the TAB2 variant present in the proband and other affected family members. The authors noted that no connective tissue abnormalities were present in this family.
300867	Lederer et al. (2012) studied 2 girls and a boy with Kabuki syndrome. The 2-year-old boy and 13-year-old girl had a typical Kabuki syndrome phenotype, including long palpebral fissures, lateral eversion of the lower eyelid, and moderate to severe intellectual disability; they also displayed long halluces. The facial features of the 10-year-old girl were not as classic, but she displayed many characteristics of the disorder, including lateral sparseness of the eyebrows, long eyelashes, strabismus, long palpebral fissures, large and prominent ears, persistent fetal fingertip pads, aortic coarctation, areolar fullness in infancy, and hirsutism; she also had mild developmental delay. Faundes et al. (2021) analyzed clinical data in 80 patients with KABUK2. The most frequent neonatal finding was feeding problems, and hypoglycemia was described in 56.4% of neonates. Motor delay was reported in 95% of patients; 73.8% of patients achieved independent walking. Speech delay was reported in 91.5%; 71.4% of patients achieved speech. Impaired intellectual development was reported in 93% of patients, with more than half having severe impairment. The most frequent congenital malformations involved the cardiovascular system (49.2%), with atrial septal defects and ventricular defects the most common malformations. Genitourinary anomalies were reported in 26.4%, with horseshoe kidney the most common anomaly. Palate and dental anomalies were seen in 64.2% and 60%, respectively. Hearing loss affected 30.8%, and 31.3% had strabismus. Other clinical findings in this cohort included recurrent infections, hyperinsulinism, seizures, joint hypermobility, and ectodermal abnormalities. Typical Kabuki syndrome facial features were seen in 63.7% of patients. A comparison of males and females in this cohort showed that males were born earlier and had shorter birth lengths; fewer males could walk independently or developed speech; and males had a higher frequency of severely impaired intellectual development and a higher frequency of gastrointestinal problems.
300868	Johnston et al. (2012) reported a family in which 2 brothers had a lethal multiple congenital anomaly disorder. Both infants were born by cesarean section due to breech presentation and were noted to have large size at birth. Both infants developed severe myoclonic seizures associated with a burst-suppression pattern on EEG in the first weeks of life; they died at 10 and 11 weeks of age. The first-born boy had Pierre-Robin sequence, a prominent occiput, enlarged fontanel, depressed nasal bridge, short, anteverted nose, malar flattening, upslanted palpebral fissures, overfolded helix, small mouth with downturned corners, and short neck. He had joint contractures, small nails, broad palms with short fingers, and hypotonia. Brain MRI showed thin corpus callosum, white matter immaturity, no septum pellucidum, and cerebellar hypoplasia. Other features included systolic murmur, atrial septal defect, obstructive apnea, vesicoureteral reflux, and a duplicated collecting system. He died of pneumonia at age 11 weeks. His brother had similar dysmorphic features, with the addition of a fused metopic suture and high-arched palate. He also had hypotonia, hyperreflexia, contractures, myoclonic seizures, and small patent ductus arteriosus. He died of respiratory failure at age 10 weeks. Postmortem examination showed thin corpus callosum, cerebellar hypoplasia, lack of the olfactory bulb and tracts, abnormal cortical lamination, and dysplastic pons. The diagnosis was hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy and brain malformation with arhinencephaly. Neither patient had evidence of hemolytic anemia or clinical hemoglobinuria, although 1 had low serum calcium and the other had increased serum alkaline phosphatase. A maternal uncle reportedly died of a 'stroke' at age 1 month. Belet et al. (2014) reported a large Belgian family in which 5 males had profound developmental retardation, axial hypotonia, infantile seizures, and hypsarrhythmia on EEG. The family was previously reported as having West syndrome by Claes et al. (1997) (family B). The patients had onset of severe infantile spasms, including myoclonic and generalized seizures, between 5 and 6 months of age. All had complete arrest of psychomotor development after seizure onset, and 4 patients died as children or young adults. Neuropathology of 1 patient showed cortical and cerebellar atrophy, neuronal loss, and gliosis and microspongiosis. Female family members were unaffected. Kato et al. (2014) reported 5 patients from 4 Japanese families with MCAHS2 manifest as early-onset epileptic encephalopathy. One of the patients had been diagnosed clinically with Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (269150) (Watanabe et al., 2012). Onset of tonic or myoclonic seizures occurred between 1 and 7 months of age, and were refractory in most patients. All had profound intellectual disability, 3 were bedridden with severe motor disturbances, and 2 brothers had a slightly less severe phenotype with no motor disturbances. EEG in the most severe cases showed hypsarrhythmia or burst-suppression pattern. The 3 most severely affected patients had dysmorphic facial features including depressed nasal bridge, short anteverted nose, downturned corners of the mouth, and high-arched palate. Brain MRI of these patients showed cortical atrophy, thin corpus callosum, delayed myelination, and deep white-matter signal abnormalities. One patient had vesicoureteral reflux, 2 had hypotonia, and 2 had joint contractures. Two patients had increased serum alkaline phosphatase. Flow cytometric analysis of patient granulocytes showed decreased expression of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein CD16 (see 146740); unaffected carrier mothers showed less severely decreased expression of CD16 on granulocytes. Van der Crabben et al. (2014) reported a boy with MCAHS2. He had delayed psychomotor development with axial hypotonia and developed refractory seizures at 8.5 months of age. He subsequently showed developmental regression with an encephalopathic phenotype. Other features included atrial septal defect and mild dysmorphic features, such as high anterior hairline, upslanting palpebral fissures, thin vermilion, long philtrum, alveolar ridge overgrowth, and absence of teeth. He also had obesity and accelerated linear growth. Brain MRI showed progressive cerebral atrophy, thin corpus callosum, and insufficient myelination. Laboratory studies showed fluctuating elevated alkaline phosphatase levels. The child died of cardiorespiratory arrest at age 2.5 years. Terespolsky et al. (1995) reported a family in which 4 maternally related male cousins were born with multiple congenital anomalies. One fetus was voluntarily aborted at 19 weeks' gestation, after multicystic kidneys were detected on ultrasound; the remaining 3 all died within the first 8 weeks of life from pneumonia or sepsis. The 3 liveborn males were hydropic at birth and had a combination of craniofacial anomalies including macrocephaly; apparently low-set posteriorly angulated ears; hypertelorism; short, broad nose with anteverted nares; large mouth with a thin vermilion upper border; prominent philtrum; high-arched or cleft palate; short neck; redundant skin; and hypoplastic nails; skeletal defects involving the upper and lower limbs; and gastrointestinal and genitourinary anomalies. All 3 patients were hypotonic and neurologically impaired from birth. With the exception of a trilobate left lung in 1 patient, the cardiorespiratory system was structurally normal. Terespolsky et al. (1995) suggested that the patients had a severe form of Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (see SGBS1, 312870). In a follow-up of the affected fetus from the family originally reported by Terespolsky et al. (1995), Fauth et al. (2016) reported that the pregnancy was terminated at 19 weeks' gestation after multiple congenital anomalies were found on prenatal imaging. Fauth et al. (2016) detected a mutation in the PIGA gene in this patient (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). Fauth et al. (2016) reported 3 male patients from 2 unrelated families with a lethal multiple congenital anomaly syndrome. One died at age 15 days, 1 died at age 3 months, and the third died in utero. A pregnancy in each family was complicated by polyhydramnios, and 2 of the patients had somatic overgrowth. Two patients had severe hypotonia and neonatal onset of seizures with a burst-suppression pattern on EEG, consistent with Ohtahara syndrome. Dysmorphic facial features included coarse facies, high anterior hairline, upslanted palpebral fissures, depressed nasal bridge with short nose and anteverted nares, retrognathia, and short webbed neck. Other common features included joint contractures, short limbs, short distal phalanges, and small penis. One patient had a small cerebellum with white matter immaturity and small optic nerves, whereas the other had a smooth gyration pattern. One of the patients had mildly increased serum alkaline phosphatase.
300869	Rio et al. (2010) reported a French family in which 3 adult males had syndromic mild mental retardation. All had low birth weight, reflecting intrauterine growth retardation, and delayed psychomotor development. One had neonatal hypotonia and failure to thrive. The patients all attended school and showed learning difficulties, but learned to read and write. Two were unable to work, but 1 worked in a factory. Dysmorphic features included deep-set eyes, bulbous nasal tip, thin lips, and small hands and feet. All had cryptorchidism and primary hypogonadism, manifest by high-pitched voice, sparse body hair, abdominal obesity, gynecomastia, and small testes. The patients had short stature, which was also found in 3 obligate female carriers. Laboratory studies showed increased gonadotropins and low testosterone; brain MRI of 1 patient was normal. Three obligate female carriers had normal cognitive findings, but short stature and early menopause. X-inactivation studies showed completely skewed inactivation in 3 of 5 female carriers.
300872	Celestino-Soper et al. (2012) found that the cognitive function of TMLHE-deficient males with autism varies widely, with a full-scale IQ ranging from 38 to 143. Five of 21 with available data were in the range of intellectual disability, and 3 of 21 were reported as untestable. One proband had seizures. Six of 6 patients for whom information was available were described as nondysmorphic. Nava et al. (2012) reported 4 boys, including 2 brothers, from 3 unrelated families with AUTSX6. The brothers, who were from Maghreb, also had moderate intellectual disability and mild variable dysmorphic features, such as ptosis, small mouth, short philtrum, large forehead, and macrosomia. Plasma available from the brothers and 1 of the unrelated patients showed increased trimethyllysine (TML) and slightly decreased or normal plasma carnitine. Ziats et al. (2015) reported a boy with autism diagnosed at age 3 years after an episode of developmental regression associated with infection. At age 4 years 11 months, he had another episode of developmental regression of unclear etiology. Detailed laboratory studies showed low plasma levels of gamma butyrobetaine (gBB) and free carnitine. TML plasma levels were normal, but urinary levels were increased, and the TML:gBB ratio was elevated.
300882	Kaiser et al. (2014) reported the clinical features of 35 individuals with CDLS5. Many features were similar to those observed in typical CDLS, including postnatal growth retardation (28%), microcephaly (29%), hearing loss (59%), gastroesophageal reflux (67%), feeding difficulties (86%), cardiac defects (36%), genitourinary anomalies (44%), and intellectual disabilities (100%). Craniofacial features were also common, such as brachycephaly (70%), arched eyebrows (88%), synophrys (90%), long eyelashes (45%), depressed nasal bridge (45%), anteverted nares (76%), long philtrum (57%), downturned corners of the mouth (57%), small widely spaced teeth (61%), micrognathia (59%), and cleft palate without cleft lip (18%). Most patients also had small hands and feet. Unique features not seen in typical CDLS included delayed fontanel closure (50%), ocular hypertelorism (47%) and/or telecanthus (64%), hooding of the upper eyelids (46%), bulbous nasal tip (66%), dental anomalies (50%), and nevus flammeus (58%). Female mutation carriers were unaffected or less severely affected than males, and most showed signs of skewed X-inactivation. In a review of the clinical features of 46 reported patients with CDLS5, including the 35 patients reported by Kaiser et al. (2014), Mordaunt and McLauchlan (2015) noted that there is a wide range of severity. Intellectual impairment ranged from mild to severe. No limb deficiency was described in any of the patients, although small hands and feet and minor digit and metacarpal anomalies were frequent. Growth appeared to be less affected in CDLS5 compared to other forms of the disorder. In a review of CDLS, Boyle et al. (2015) noted that patients with CDLS5 have features similar to those in patients with other forms of the disorder, but they tend to have delayed closing of the anterior fontanel, hypertelorism with hooding of the eyelids, broad nose, well-formed philtrum and upper lip, and dental anomalies. Both affected and unaffected female mutation carriers have been reported. Jezela-Stanek et al. (2019) reported a patient with CDLS5 who had dysmorphic facies, delayed closure of the fontanels, atrial septal defects, submucosal cleft palate, and significant developmental delay. His facial features were notable for deep-set eyes with hooded eyelids, broad nasal tip and long columella, short philtrum, and widely spaced teeth with oligodontia. He had small hands and feet with partial 2-3 toe syndactyly and valgus deformity of the halluces. He had recurrent urinary tract infections that led to impaired renal function, and resection of the posterior urethral valves was performed. He also had bilateral conductive hearing loss, secondary to chronic otitis, and myopia. He required a gastrostomy because of a severe eating disorder involving poor suck and gastroesophageal reflux. Harakalova et al. (2012) reported a 5-generation Dutch family in which 7 males had a severe intellectual developmental disorder and 7 females had a milder phenotype. The males had mental retardation, truncal obesity, gynecomastia, hypogonadism, short stature, small hands, and a typical face characterized by a small head, small ears, prominent supraorbital ridges, deep-set eyes, high malar bones, broad nasal tip, columella somewhat below the nasal alae, thin upper vermilion, and retrognathia. None of the men could live independently. Female carriers had learning disorders and recognizable facial features, including high malar bones and broad nasal tip. In addition, 2 males and 1 female had learning problems without additional features. By next-generation sequencing of the chromosome X exome in this family, Harakalova et al. (2012) identified a mutation in the HDAC8 gene (300269.0001). Female carriers showed complex X inactivation, with preferential silencing of the mutant allele.
300884	De Ligt et al. (2012) reported a 10-year-old girl (trio 37) who was born at 34 weeks' gestation and showed neonatal feeding problems, hypotonia, seizures, and severely delayed psychomotor development. She had a large head circumference (greater than 2.5 SD), and brain MRI showed hydrocephalus, myelination delay, and wide sulci. Other features included self-mutilation, sleep disturbance, and dysmorphic features, such as hypertelorism, broad coarse face, low-set ears, mild retromicrognathia, small hands and feet, joint contractures, and scoliosis. Isoelectric focusing of transferrin was not reported. Timal et al. (2012) reported a Caucasian boy with a severe multisystem disorder resulting in death at 1 year of age. He had refractory epilepsy with polymorphic seizures, hepatomegaly, swelling of hands, feet, and eyelids, recurrent infections, increased bleeding tendency, microcephaly, horizontal nystagmus, bilateral optic nerve atrophy, and extrapyramidal and pyramidal signs. Laboratory studies showed prolonged APPT. Transferrin isoelectric focusing showed abnormal N-glycosylation consistent with CDG type I. The Epi4K Consortium and Epilepsy Phenome/Genome Project (2013) reported 2 unrelated girls (patients ij and dg) with onset of infantile spasms associated with hypsarrhythmia on EEG at ages 1 and 4 months, respectively. Both had severely delayed psychomotor development after the onset of seizures: they were nonverbal, unable to walk, and had poor visual contact. Isoelectric focusing of transferrin was not reported in these patients. Michaud et al. (2014) reported a girl with DEE36. She was diagnosed with focal infantile spasms at age 4 months. She had global developmental delay and severe intellectual disability. EEG showed hypsarrhythmia and multifocal discharges; brain MRI showed cerebral atrophy. Isoelectric focusing of serum transferrin was not reported. Smith-Packard et al. (2015) reported a 7-year-old girl with DEE36. She was diagnosed with cortical visual impairment at age 5 months and showed developmental regression at age 6 months. At age 8 months, she developed spasms associated with hypsarrhythmia on EEG. The seizures remitted until age 5 years, when they became more severe and difficult to control. She had severe cognitive impairment with limited language (IQ range, 20-25), as well as feeding difficulties with gastric reflux necessitating a feeding tube. Isoelectric focusing of serum transferrin was normal. Smith-Packard et al. (2015) suggested that the disease mechanism in females with ALG13 mutations may differ from that observed in males. Dimassi et al. (2016) reported a 6-year-old girl who developed infantile spasms associated with hypsarrhythmia at age 2 months. She had severely delayed psychomotor development, was unable to sit, and had poor head control and limited eye contact. EEG showed slow background activity with multifocal spike and spike-wave discharges. Brain MRI showed global atrophy. She also had mild dysmorphic features, including hypertelorism, upturned nose, long philtrum, and adducted thumbs. Western blot analysis showed normally glycosylated transferrin isoforms. Bastaki et al. (2018) reported a female infant, born of consanguineous Emirati parents, with infantile spasms, hypotonia, developmental delay, gastroesophageal reflux, and cortical visual impairment. EEG showed modified hypsarrhythmia, diagnostic of West syndrome. Brain imaging revealed diffuse moderate widening of the extradural space, consistent with cortical atrophy. Ng et al. (2020) reported 29 individuals with de novo heterozygous (female) or hemizygous (male) mutations in the ALG13 gene detected by next-generation sequencing. Clinical details were available for 26 patients: 1 excluded patient had no clinical information, 1 had intractable seizures and died at 13 years of age, and 1 (CDG-0078) was an unaffected female whose monozygotic twin (CDG-0077) had DEE36. Further studies of the unaffected twin were not possible, but skewed X-inactivation was postulated. Of the 26 patients, all had global developmental delay with impaired intellectual development and 24 had confirmed epilepsy. There were only 2 males in the cohort; the phenotype was similar to that of the females. The patients presented at a mean age of 6.5 months with infantile spasms associated with hypsarrhythmia on EEG, consistent with West syndrome. The epilepsy tended to be refractory to treatment, although rare patients responded to benzodiazepines or a ketogenic diet. The phenotype progressed to Lennox-Gastaut syndrome in 6 individuals. Brain imaging was either normal or showed nonspecific findings, such as cerebral atrophy. Hypotonia was common, and about half of patients had additional features, including feeding difficulties, ocular defects, skeletal anomalies like scoliosis, and dysmorphic facial features. Analysis of serum transferrin in 14 patients showed no glycosylation defects, although 2 had mild transient abnormalities that resolved. Hamici et al. (2017) reported a 2-year-old girl with severe infantile epileptic encephalopathy. She presented at 6 months of age with infantile spasms and gastroesophageal reflux. At 8 months of age she had developmental delay, hypotonia, brisk deep tendon reflexes, and abnormal eye movements. Dysmorphic features included brachycephaly, synophrys, micrognathia, and inverted nipples. An EEG showed a pattern of modified hypsarrhythmia. Laboratory studies showed elevated PTT, antithrombin III, and protein S. Transferrin electrophoresis was normal. Brain MRI showed cortical atrophy. Galama et al. (2018) reported a 3.5-month-old boy with developmental delay, axial hypotonia, plagiocephaly, mild retrognathia, mild torticollis, and hemivertebrae of L1-L2. At 4.5 months of age he developed infantile spasms and hypsarrhythmia on EEG. Brain MRI showed hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and mildly delayed myelination. Alsharhan et al. (2021) reported clinical features in 11 unrelated patients (3 males, 8 females), aged 7 months to 13 years. Ten patients had neurodevelopmental abnormalities including intellectual disability (10/11), seizures (8/11), hypotonia (6/11), and microcephaly (6/11). Abnormal brain imaging was reported in 5 of 9 patients and findings included brain atrophy and prominence of the subarachnoid spaces. Ophthalmologic findings included cortical visual impairment in 2 patients, myopia in 1, and strabismus in 1. One patient had sensorineural hearing loss. Three patients had feeding difficulties and required tube feeding. Four patients had facial dysmorphisms including prominent forehead, bulbous nose, widely spaced teeth, and smooth philtrum. Gadomski et al. (2017) reported a boy with mild hypotonia as a baby and mild motor delay noted at 15 months of age. He presented at 3 years of age with tonic clonic seizures and an EEG showed general epileptic abnormalities. A brain MRI showed nonspecific white matter changes in the bilateral peritriagonal regions. On examination at age 3, he had brachycephaly and dolichocephaly. He also had mild cerebellar dysfunction, delayed fine motor development, and appropriate cognitive development.
300887	Zvulunov et al. (1998) described a female infant, born of unrelated Jewish parents, who at birth had extensive areas of denuded skin over the neck and face with reepithelialization already apparent in some of the lesions. In addition, well-defined depressed linear scars were present along the midline of the nose and chin, and over the extensor surfaces of the fourth fingers on both hands. Histologic examination of perilesional skin did not show intraepidermal or subepidermal cleavage, and there was regeneration of the dermis and a mild perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate in the upper dermis. Electron microscopy of perilesional skin revealed 'peculiar' cytoplasmic bodies within keratinocytes that measured about 80 to 100 nm in diameter and had an electron-dense membrane; the bodies resembled viral particles but none contained chromatin and there was no cytopathic effect in the nuclei. Histologic examination of uninvolved skin was unremarkable. At 2 years of age, facial dysmorphism was noted that included hypertelorism, high forehead, and long philtrum. She also had short stature, small head circumference, and weight below the 3rd centile for age; psychomotor development was normal. The mother had 3 subsequent pregnancies, 2 of which terminated in spontaneous abortion during the first trimester and 1 of which resulted in the birth of a healthy girl. Zvulunov et al. (1998) noted that the clinical presentation strikingly resembled that reported in the syndrome of linear facial skin defects with microphthalmia (LSDMCA1; 309801), which was associated with deletion on chromosome Xp22; however, FISH analysis using Xp22.3-specific probes showed normal labeling of the X chromosomes in this patient. Indrieri et al. (2012) studied 2 female patients with linear skin defects and facial dysmorphism, 1 of whom was the patient originally reported by Zvulunov et al. (1998), as well as an affected mother and daughter. The previously unreported girl was born at term of nonconsanguineous parents and presented with poor growth, microcephaly, multiple linear skin defects on the face and neck, an asymmetric face with limited eyelid closure, small chin, and right clubfoot. Cranial ultrasound revealed a thin corpus callosum but no ocular abnormalities, and echocardiogram showed ventricular hypertrophy, pulmonary hypertension, and a small atrial septal defect. A right diaphragmatic hernia was surgically corrected, and she had left renal agenesis and ureteral duplication of the right kidney. Follow-up examination showed short stature; linear skin defects had healed over time, although they were still evident on the cheeks and chin; and she had mild psychomotor delay and learning difficulties. The affected mother and daughter had linear skin defects apparent at birth; the daughter was the product of the mother's fourth pregnancy, the 3 earlier pregnancies having ended in spontaneous abortion in the first trimester. Additional features in the daughter included microcephaly, linear and patchy erythroderma on the cheeks and neck, facial dysmorphism including telecanthus, arched eyebrows, long upslanting palpebral fissures, short nose, mild retrognathia, and posteriorly rotated ears. She had tetralogy of Fallot, an asymmetric thorax with widely spaced nipples, bilateral clinodactyly of the fifth fingers, and bilateral sandal gap. She developed intellectual disabilities and was diagnosed with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder at 4 years of age; brain MRI showed delayed myelination. She had poor vision, and ophthalmologic examination revealed pale optic discs and altered visual evoked potentials. Array CGH excluded deletion of the Xp22 region; she had a 387-kb microduplication of unknown clinical significance on chromosome 12p13.33 that was also present in her healthy father.
300888	Sun et al. (2012) studied a Dutch family in which the proband was diagnosed with central hypothyroidism by neonatal screening. A male cousin was referred for growth failure at 7.3 years of age and was also found to have central hypothyroidism, as well as partial growth hormone (GH; 139250) deficiency and low prolactin (PRL; 176760) concentration. In early adolescence, both boys initially had normal progression of testicular growth, but their testes subsequently grew beyond the reference range for testis volume. However, their serum testosterone concentrations remained inappropriately low for testicular size until ages 15 and 14 years, respectively, causing a late growth spurt and delayed pubic hair development. Their maternal grandfather and another male relative were later also found to have central hypothyroidism and enlarged testicles. Additional families with male-specific central hypothyroidism and testicular enlargement were subsequently identified genetically with mutation in the IGSF1 gene. Sun et al. (2012) observed considerable differences in the extent of hypothyroidism within families, with some older patients diagnosed only after genetic screening. Testicular development showed a characteristic pattern involving normal testicular volume in childhood; increase in testicular volume from approximately 11 years of age onward, while serum testosterone was still low; relatively large testes for serum testosterone levels in adolescence; and macroorchidism in adulthood. In 10 of 11 cases for which data were available, there was delayed testosterone production or delayed pubertal growth spurt. Serum prolactin concentrations were decreased in 18 of 26 cases, and 4 patients showed growth retardation in childhood associated with GH insufficiency. Three of 11 patients who underwent MRI had abnormal findings, showing a frontoparietal hygroma, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, and a small stalk lesion, respectively; however, in the remaining 8 patients, MRIs were normal. At the most recent evaluation of the cohort, mean height was close to population references, but BMI was increased in 11 of 13 adults and 5 of 13 children. Plasma testosterone levels were normal in most cases. The authors noted that central hypothyroidism was also present in 5 of 20 heterozygous female carriers. Joustra et al. (2013) reported follow-up evaluation of 24 male patients from 10 families with IGSF1-associated central hypothyroidism previously studied by Sun et al. (2012), as well as 18 heterozygous female relatives. All male patients had central hypothyroidism and macroorchidism, 16 (67%) had hypoprolactinemia, and 3 (13%) had transient partial GH deficiency. Disharmonious pubertal delay was observed in all 8 male patients who were diagnosed in childhood, with delay of pubertal testosterone production, growth spurt, and pubic hair development, whereas testicular enlargement began at a normal age and continued into adulthood. Among the heterozygous female carriers, 6 (33%) had central hypothyroidism and 2 (11%) had hypoprolactinemia; none had GH deficiency. Body mass index (BMI), percent fat, and waist circumference tended to be elevated in male patients as well as in female carriers. The authors designated this disorder 'IGFS1 deficiency syndrome.' Joustra et al. (2016) reviewed the clinical and biochemical characteristics of patients and female carriers from the 10 families with IGSF1-associated central hypothyroidism previously reported by Joustra et al. (2013) as well as from 20 newly ascertained unrelated families, for a total of 69 affected males and 56 female carriers. Central hypothyroidism was present in all hemizygous males. Growth velocity was usually decreased and bone age delayed; GH deficiency in childhood was noted in 11 (16%) patients. Transient neonatal hypocortisolism was present in 6 (21%) of 28 male newborns for whom data were available, resolving within a few years in all. Pubertal rise in testosterone was often delayed, in contrast to a normal or even advanced start of testicular growth, with macroorchidism present in 88% of adult males. Prolonged jaundice and sometimes dyslipidemia were observed in untreated children. Waist circumference was increased in 60% of male patients, but blood lipids were normal. In adult males, a marker of liver hypothyroidism, sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG; 182205), was significantly correlated to FT4 levels after correction for BMI, implying suboptimal thyroid hormone exposure in untreated individuals. Female carriers showed low (18%) or low-normal (60%) FT4; no evident relationship with X-chromosome inactivation was observed. Although delayed age at menarche was present in 31% and mild prolactin deficiency in 22%, there were no reported problems with fertility. Increased waist circumference was also present in 57% of carriers, and there was a negative correlation between FT4 levels and metabolic parameters. The authors observed no clear genotype/phenotype relationship associated with any of the features in these patients, and noted that signs and symptoms varied within families among patients with the same mutation. Joustra et al. (2016) stated that mutation in IGSF1 represents the most common genetic cause of central hypothyroidism. Tenenbaum-Rakover et al. (2016) reported 3 brothers, born of unrelated Ashkenazi Jewish parents, as well as a maternal uncle, who had central hypothyroidism and a mutation in the IGSF1 gene. Hypoprolactinemia was present in 1 of the brothers and in the uncle. All 4 had normal growth patterns, and the adult male was within the normal range for adult height. The 3 brothers were prepubertal, with normal testicular volumes at ages 8 years, 5 years, and 10 months; their 27-year-old uncle exhibited macroorchidism. All 4 affected males showed subtle neurologic symptoms, including hypotonia, delayed motor development, speech problems, attention-deficit disorder, and clumsiness. Another maternal uncle was diagnosed with hypothyroidism at age 3 months, but never treated. He reportedly had significant psychomotor delay in infancy and clumsiness as well as speech problems in adulthood, but he declined to participate in the study. The brothers had 2 sisters with normal psychomotor development and normal thyroid function, and their parents were both healthy and had normal thyroid function tests. Roche et al. (2018) studied a 3-generation Irish family with IGSF1-associated central hypothyroidism in which there were 10 affected males and 11 carrier females. All hemizygous males had mild or moderate central hypothyroidism. Neonatal jaundice, delayed speech or growth, and obesity were observed in 7 patients in whom diagnosis was delayed. The authors observed variable 'physiologic penetrance,' in which the patient with the lowest FT4 level appeared to be physiologically euthyroid, whereas other patients with biochemically milder disease exhibited features consistent with tissue hypothyroidism, including growth impairment and weight gain. The authors also noted normal or 'exuberant' TSH responses to TRH testing in hemizygotes from the Irish family, in contrast to previous reports of subnormal or low-normal responses in patients with IGSF1-associated hypothyroidism. Low or borderline prolactin was present in 5 patients; 1 patient had growth hormone deficiency, and another had insufficient GH concentrations on stimulation testing, with normal IGF1 and growth velocity. Testicular ultrasound was performed in 1 adult hemizygous male and confirmed macroorchidism. Only 1 of 11 heterozygous females showed central hypothyroidism, although the majority of heterozygotes had FT4 levels in the lower third of the reference range.
614402	Slavotinek et al. (2012) studied an Egyptian boy, born of consanguineous parents, in whom bilateral severe microphthalmia and bilateral cleft lip and palate were noted at birth. At age 4 months, his development was delayed, he had no head control, and his anterior fontanel was open. Chest, heart, abdomen, genitalia, skeletal system, skin, and muscle tone were unremarkable, and hearing was reported to be normal. At 3.5 years of age, weight, height, and head circumference were at the 3rd centile, and he had global developmental delay, with a developmental level of 6 months. MRI of the brain revealed absence of normal ocular globes bilaterally, with a fluid-filled cyst in the right orbit, and small optic nerves. The corpus callosum and pineal gland were absent, and the hippocampus had a vertical orientation. The parents had no obvious eye malformations, and there was an unaffected sib.
614409	Boukhris et al. (2008) reported a consanguineous Tunisian family (TUN35) in which 5 individuals had a form of early-onset complicated spastic paraplegia. The patients had insidious onset of stiffness and weakness of the lower limbs between 2 and 10 years of age. On physical examination at ages 30 to 35 years, there was a mild to moderate handicap, with only 1 patient requiring a walking aid. All patients showed typical signs of spastic paraplegia, such as spastic gait and weakness of the lower limbs with brisk reflexes and bilateral extensor plantar responses. More variable features included upper limb spasticity and weakness, pseudobulbar dysarthria (in 3), and bladder dysfunction (in 2). Intellectual development was normal in early childhood, but mild cognitive decline appeared progressively as gait difficulties worsened. All also had upper limb dysmetria, suggestive of cerebellar dysfunction, as well as congenital bilateral cataract. Four patients had pes cavus, 2 had scoliosis, and 1 had decreased vibration sense. Brain imaging of 2 patients showed thinning of the corpus callosum and mild cerebellar and cerebral atrophy. Linkage to SPG11 (604360), SPG15 (270700), and other known SPG loci was excluded. Martin et al. (2013) restudied the Tunisian family reported by Boukhris et al. (2008) and presented 3 additional families with SPG46. There were 11 patients in all. The phenotype was homogeneous: patients presented with progressive difficulty walking due to lower limb spasticity in infancy or childhood (range, 1-16 years), resulting in a need for a cane in their twenties and a wheelchair in their fifties. All developed cerebellar ataxia and cataracts. All patients also had mild to moderate mental impairment, which progressed to dementia in older age. Three patients had hearing loss, and 3 had an axonal neuropathy. Brain MRI showed atrophy of the cerebrum, cerebellum, and corpus callosum. Two affected males had testicular hypotrophy with normal hormone function. Semen analysis of 1 of these men showed severe spermatozoid head abnormalities with necrospermia and reduced velocity, consistent with infertility. Hammer et al. (2013) reported 4 unrelated Tunisian families with an autosomal recessive neurologic disorder. Three of the families had previously been reported by Bouhlal et al. (2005). All patients presented in the first or second decades with cerebellar ataxia and later developed prominent spasticity with hyperreflexia and extensor plantar responses, as well as an axonal peripheral neuropathy. Only 1 patient had mild cognitive impairment. More variable features included scoliosis, Hoffman sign, and head tremor. Brain imaging was normal, except in 1 patient who had cerebral, cerebellar, and corpus callosum atrophy. Votsi et al. (2014) reported 3 sibs, born of consanguineous Cypriot parents, with SPG46. The patients presented at ages 14, 13, and 20 years, respectively, with marked spasticity in the lower limbs resulting in gait disturbances. The patients also had cerebellar ataxia, with truncal ataxia and wide-based gait. Other features included upper limb spasticity, pes cavus, tendon contractures, jerky ocular pursuit, and nystagmus. The disorder was progressive, and all became wheelchair-bound within 20 to 25 years of disease onset. Later in the disease course, the patients developed additional features, including mild cognitive impairment, hearing loss, urinary incontinence, spastic dysarthria and dysphagia, and decreased vibration sense in the distal lower limbs. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy.
614415	Ravenscroft et al. (2011) reported a mother and son with chilblain lupus. From the age of 4 years, the 46-year-old white mother experienced recurrent lesions, particularly prominent over the winter months, affecting her hands, feet, buttocks, and thighs. She also had sun sensitivity with a tendency to develop a sunburn-like reaction with minimal sun exposure. She developed angiomatous lesions on the fingers, which became persistent. Biopsy of chilblain skin demonstrated a florid lymphocytic vasculitis, with papillary dermal edema, interface dermatitis, and keratinocyte necrosis, consistent with lupus. She was managed with nifedipine over the winter months and hydroxychloroquine plus sun block in the summer. At age 3 months, her 15-year-old son developed chilblains on the feet, fingers, and ears. Later, he also experienced photosensitivity with a sunburn-like reaction to sunlight, and developed fixed angiomatous lesions on the fingers. Both patients were in otherwise good health.
614416	Laue et al. (2011) reported 3 sibs and an unrelated Turkish patient with craniosynostosis and multiple skeletal anomalies. The 3 sibs, born to first-cousin parents, exhibited occipital encephalocele, radiohumeral fusions, oligodactyly, advanced osseous maturation, and calvarial mineralization defects. The proband presented as a fetal death in utero at 35 weeks' gestation; the pregnancies of his sibs were terminated at 15 and 12 weeks' gestation after ultrasonography showed them to be affected. The Turkish patient, born to consanguineous parents, had coronal and lambdoid craniosynostosis, a large sagittal skull defect, limited elbow extension, and arachnodactyly. She died from unknown causes at age 5 months. She was thought to have Antley-Bixler syndrome (see 207410), but no mutations were found in the FGFR2 (176943) or POR (124015) genes or in the FGF9 gene (600921).
614417	Salzmann et al. (2012) reported 3 unrelated Caucasian patients, aged 39, 42, and 49 years, with temporal lobe epilepsy. Two had onset at ages 23 and 5 years, respectively; information about age at onset was not available for the third patient. Seizures could be localized to the temporoparietal junction in 1 patient. One patient had neonatal sequelae, which was not further explained, another had bitemporal atrophy on MRI, and a third had a cavernous malformation. None had a history of febrile seizures, although 1 patient had a paternal grandfather with a reported history of febrile seizures. Sapio et al. (2012) reported a 20-year-old man (ET174) with ETL5. He had onset of seizures at age 7 and was found to have hippocampal sclerosis.
614418	Salzmann et al. (2012) reported 4 sibs, born of consanguineous Moroccan parents, with highly variable manifestations of a seizure disorder. Three patients had febrile seizures only, and 1 had febrile seizures and later developed temporal lobe epilepsy. The first patient was a 30-year-old woman who had a single febrile seizure at age 3 years, with no recurrence and normal psychomotor development. The second patient, aged 26 years, had 2 simple and 1 complex partial febrile seizure between 9 and 10 months of age. At age 17, she developed recurrent complex partial seizures with right temporal spikes on EEG associated with right hippocampal atrophy on brain imaging. Psychomotor development was normal, and she was said to be in remission at age 26. The third patient was a 17-year-old girl who had a single complex febrile seizure and 2 simple febrile seizures at age 3 years, which were successfully treated with no recurrence; psychomotor development was normal. The fourth patient was a 9-year-old boy who had neonatal convulsions with intracerebral hemorrhage. This was followed by simple and complex febrile seizures during infancy as well as recurrence at age 7 when treatment was stopped. He had mild mental delay.
614420	Al-Mayouf et al. (2011) studied 7 Arab families in which at least 2 sibs had systemic lupus erythematosus and healthy consanguineous parents. All affected individuals had pediatric onset of SLE, and there was high frequency of anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and lupus nephritis.
614424	Boycott et al. (2007) reported 10 patients with Joubert syndrome in a Canadian Hutterite population. Clinical features included severe to profound developmental delay, hypotonia, ataxia, abnormal breathing pattern, nystagmus, strabismus, and the molar tooth sign. The characteristic facial features included a tall forehead, malar flattening, hypertelorism, deep-set eyes, downslanting palpebral fissures, ptosis, epicanthal folds, arched eyebrows, high nasal bridge, short philtrum with tented upper lip, open mouth, and posteriorly rotated low-set ears. Other variable features included retinal colobomas, postaxial polydactyly, cystic kidneys, occipital encephalocele, and posterior fossa abnormalities. There was increased mortality. Seven of the patients had previously been diagnosed as having Meckel syndrome (see, e.g., 249000). Boycott et al. (2007) also reviewed a report of 3 Hutterite patients reported as having Meckel syndrome (Schurig et al., 1980) and concluded that all had a variant of Joubert syndrome. Mutations and deletions in the NPHP1 gene, as well as evaluation of known loci for Meckel and Joubert syndrome, were all excluded, suggesting further genetic heterogeneity. Janecke et al. (2004) reported a consanguineous Austrian family in which 3 members had Joubert syndrome. The first affected infant showed an irregular breathing pattern soon after birth. She had aplasia of the cerebellar vermis, right-sided renal cyst, and poor psychomotor development with hypotonia. She died of pneumonia at age 4 years. A younger sib was noted to have meningocele, absence of the cerebellar vermis, and cystic kidneys on prenatal ultrasound, and the pregnancy was terminated. The third infant, born to another branch of this kindred, had abnormal breathing in the first weeks of life, irregular, jerky eye movements, aplasia of the cerebellar vermis, hypoplasia of the upper brainstem, and multiple renal cysts. She had poor psychomotor development and lack of speech. All 3 patients also had the morning glory sign on funduscopic examination, consisting of an enlarged, excavated disc with a central gliotic tuft and peripapillary pigment changes. CT showed funnel-shaped optic discs. None had any evidence of hepatic involvement. Linkage studies were inconclusive.
